---
title: ASIH09 workshop
---

==Workshop on "Ontologies for Ichtyology and Herpetology"==

Held in conjunction with the 2009 ASIH meetings, Portland Oregon, July 2009

==Abstracts==

''A Gentle Introduction to Ontologies for Biology''

Hilmar Lapp (1), Todd J. Vision (1,2)

# US National Evolutionary Synthesis Center
# University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

As biology has become increasingly data-rich, the reliance on databases and
computation to integrate and mine the vast body of knowledge traditionally
reported in the literature has grown dramatically. This has inspired the
development of computational technologies to allow the exploration and
linking of diverse types of data across biological databases at
unprecedented scales. One of the most important technologies is an
“ontology”, a hierarchically structured, controlled vocabulary of
well-defined terms and the logical relationships that hold between them.
Ontologies have been applied with tremendous success to transform scientific
results traditionally reported as free text into a digital representation
that is unambiguous, uniform across disciplines, and readily computable. For
example, ontologies of biochemical functions and biological processes are
used to unambiguously record what is known about a gene's function. Anatomy
ontologies are now being used to unequivocally describe the morphological
characteristics visible in a specimen image. Efforts (including two in
ichthyology and herpetology) are underway to develop ontologies that will
ultimately span the breadth of biological knowledge, which will have a
profound impact on the way that biologists interact with data collections in
the future. In order to be useful community resources, ontologies must
accurately capture the state of biological knowledge, which requires that
the biological community through their experts play an active role in their
development.  Here, I will provide a beginner’s guide to the world of
ontologies and offer a roadmap for how biologists can best take advantage
of, and contribute to, the growing suite of bio-ontology resources.

=== Westerfield title TBA ===

Monte Westerfield

Director, Zebrafish Information Network and Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon


===''Phenoscape: Using Ontologies to Link Comparative Morphology to Genes''===

Paula Mabee

University of South Dakota

[final version?] Decades of comparative anatomical studies in ichthyology and
herpetology have resulted in a rich body of ‘free-text’ data.  As these data
grow, they are increasingly hard to align and synthesize across taxonomic
groups, and synthetic questions concerning the developmental and genetic
basis of evolutionary changes in morphology cannot be easily or efficiently
addressed.  In order for this volume of comparative anatomical data to be
analyzed in a developmental genetic context, it must first be rendered
computable.  One way to achieve this is to use ontologies. Using
ostariophysan fishes as a prototype, the Phenoscape project has developed a
system that includes ontologies representing expert knowledge of anatomy and
taxonomy (the Teleost Anatomy Ontology and the Teleost Taxonomy Ontology),
software for data curation (Phenex), and a knowledgebase that supports
ontology-based reasoning about evolutionary phenotype data (PhenoscapeKB,
http://phenoscape.org/kb).  To date, over 5,000 characters from the
phylogenetic literature have been annotated for 8,300 species, resulting in
over eight million annotated phenotypes.  PhenoscapeKB combines these
evolutionary phenotypes with information about genetically characterized
phenotype from ZFIN, the zebrafish community database. Through
ontology-based reasoning over expert knowledge in taxonomy, comparative
anatomy and developmental genetics, PhenoscapeKB can be used to address a
host of questions spanning the domains of genetics, development and
evolutionary biology, such as the nature of the genetic changes underlying
phenotypic variation among taxa in nature.

===''Development of an Anatomical Ontology for Amphibians''===

Anne Maglia (1), Jennifer Leopold (1), Susan Gauch (2), Analia Pugener (1)

#  Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO, United States
#  University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, United States

Herein, we describe our ongoing efforts to develop a robust ontology for
amphibian anatomy (www.amphibanat.org) that accommodates the diversity of
anatomical structures present in the group. We discuss the design and
implementation of the project, current resolutions to issues we have
encountered, and future enhancements to the ontology. We also comment on
efforts to integrate other data sets with the amphibian anatomical ontology.

===''Bgee: Integrating ontology and homology for the study of gene expression evolution''===

Marc Robinson-Rechavi

Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, Lausanne University and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics

The study of the evolution of developmental processes (evo-devo) has
shown that the primary source of change in the evolution of
phenotypes is changes in gene expression. Comparing gene expression
patterns between animals thus is a major step to understand their
evolution. This approach requires dedicated bioinformatics tools to
perform high throughput analyses. Thus we have developed Bgee, a
database designed to compare expression patterns between animals, by
implementing ontologies describing anatomies and developmental stages
of species, and then designing homology relationships between
anatomies and comparison criteria between developmental stages. To
define homology relationships between anatomical features we have
developed the software Homolonto, which uses a modified ontology
alignment approach to propose homology relationships between
ontologies. Bgee then uses these aligned ontologies, onto which
heterogeneous expression data types are mapped. These include
microarrays, in situ hybridization, and ESTs, from human, mouse,
xenopus and zebrafish. Bgee is available at http://bgee.unil.ch/

===Vize Ttitle TBA===

Peter Vize

University of Calgary