---
title: CoF schema
---

<pre>
GENERA
	[CAS_GEN] [int] 				-- Unique identifying number.
	[GEN_NAME] [nvarchar] (25)  	-- Genus or subgenus name.
	[SUBGEN] [nvarchar] (25)  		-- If Gen_name is a subgenus, then this is the genus .
	[AUTH] [nvarchar] (75)  		-- Author - person who described the genus/subgenus.
	[QUALIFICATION] [nvarchar] (65)	-- Author of publication in which the description appears if not the same as genus author.
	[YR] [nvarchar] (5)  			-- Year of description publication.
	[DESPP] [nvarchar] (17)  		-- Page numbers on which description appears.
	[LineageID] [int]  				-- Link to Lineage table.
	[PP] [nvarchar] (4)  			-- Ignore.
	[CAS_REF_NO] [int]  			-- Link to Referenc table.
	[GEND] [nvarchar] (1)  			-- Gender.
	[DONE] [nvarchar] (1)  			-- Once used to track data entry status; no longer used.
	[TYP_SP] [nvarchar] (43)  		-- Type species of the genus-level name.
	[AUT_TYP_SP] [nvarchar] (60)  	-- Author of the type species.
	[YR_TYP_SP] [nvarchar] (5)  	-- Year type species was described.
	[SEN_OB_SYN] [nvarchar] (50)	-- Senior objective synonym - name which the type species is now recognized as.
	[HOW] [nvarchar] (3)  			-- Abbreviation for type_desig?.
	[TYPE_DESIG] [nvarchar] (80)  	-- Type designation.
	[AVAIL] [nvarchar] (1)  		-- Available.
	[NOTES] [nvarchar] (146)			
	[STATUS] [ntext]  				
	[COMMENTS] [ntext]  			
	[STAT_CODE] [nvarchar] (9)  	-- Values=Valid,Synonym,Uncertain,Unknown.
	[STAT_CODE1] [nvarchar] (20)  	-- Further explanation of Stat_Code.
	[CURR_GEN] [nvarchar] (25)  	-- Ignore. Use CurrentGenusID instead.
	[CURR_AUTH] [nvarchar] (80)  	-- Ignore. Use CurrentGenusID to find linked record to find current genus author.
	[CURR_SUBGEN] [nvarchar] (25)	-- Current subgenus that this taxon is recognized as.
	[CURR_AUTHYRSub] [nvarchar] (60)	-- Author of current subgenus.
	[REMARKS] [ntext]				
	[LIST] [nvarchar] (1)			
	[ENTERED] [nvarchar] (5)			
	[DATEENTERED] [smalldatetime]		
	[CHECKED] [nvarchar] (5)			
	[DATECHECKED] [smalldatetime]		
	[TimeStamp] [datetime]			
	[CurrentGenusID] [int]			-- Current genus that this taxon is recognized as being, or being under if this is a subgenus. Link to Genera table.


SPECIES
	[CAS_SPC] [int]					-- Unique identifying number.
	[ORIG_NAME] [nvarchar] (40)		-- Original upper part of the scientific name, i.e. Genus if orig_level is species, Genus and species if orig_level is subspecies.
	[TAXON_NAME] [nvarchar] (25)	-- Original taxon name.
	[ORIG_LEVEL] [nvarchar] (10)	-- Values=species,subspecies,variety.
	[VARIETY] [nvarchar] (7)		-- Further explanation of orig_level.
	[AUTHOR] [nvarchar] (75)		-- Author of taxon.
	[QUALIFICATION] [nvarchar] (65)	-- Author of publication in which the description appears if not the same as taxon author.
	[YR] [nvarchar] (8)				-- Year of description publication.
	[JOUR_delete] [nvarchar] (7)	-- Ignore.
	[JOUR_NAME_delete] [nvarchar] (60)	-- Ignore.
	[CITATION] [nvarchar] (23)		-- Ignore.
	[DESCR_PP] [nvarchar] (20)		-- Page numbers on which description appears.
	[ILLUS] [nvarchar] (50)			-- Illustrations and figures.
	[CAS_REF_NO] [int] 				-- Link to Referenc table.
	[DONE] [nvarchar] (1)			-- ?
	[LineageID] [int] 				-- Link to Lineage table.
	[CURR_GENUS] [nvarchar] (40)	-- Ignore. Use Curr_GenusID instead.
	[CURR_NAME] [nvarchar] (25)		-- Current taxon which this taxon is now recognized as.
	[CURR_AUTH] [nvarchar] (80)		-- Author and year of description of current taxon.
	[CURR_YR] [nvarchar] (8)		-- Year of description of current taxon.
	[CURR_SUBSP] [nvarchar] (25)	-- Current subspecies which this taxon is now recognized as.
	[CURR_AUTHYRSub] [nvarchar] (75)	-- Author and year of publication of description of current subspecies.
	[AVAILABLE] [nvarchar] (1)		
	[STAT_CODE] [nvarchar] (9)		-- Values=Valid,Synonym,Uncertain,Unknown.
	[STAT_CODE1] [nvarchar] (20)	-- Further explanation of Stat_Code.
	[CURRSTATUS] [ntext]
	[COMMENTS] [ntext]	
	[TYPECAT] [nvarchar] (255)
	[PRIM_CODE] [nvarchar] (25)
	[PRIM_TYPE] [nvarchar] (50)
	[TYPE_LOCAL] [nvarchar] (255)
	[DISTRIBUTION] [ntext]
	[TYPES] [ntext]
	[NOTES] [nvarchar] (200)
	[Fresh] [bit]
	[Brackish] [bit]
	[Marine] [bit]
	[LIST] [nvarchar] (1)
	[REMARKS] [ntext]
	[ENTERED] [nvarchar] (5)
	[DATEENTERED] [smalldatetime]
	[CHECKED] [nvarchar] (5)
	[DATECHECKED] [smalldatetime]
	[TimeStamp] [datetime]
	[Curr_GenusID] [int]			-- ID of genus in which this taxon is currently classified. FK to Genera table.


LINEAGES	(This is a flat table and is not recursive)
	[LineageID] [int]				-- Unique identifying number.
	[NAME] [nvarchar] (30)			-- Taxon name.
	[AUTHOR_DATE] [nvarchar] (30)	-- Author and date of taxon.
	[COMMONNAME] [nvarchar] (75)	-- Common name.
	[INDEXNAME] [nvarchar] (70)		-- keywords.
	[SYN] [bit]
	[CLASS_NM] [nvarchar] (30)		-- Class.
	[ORD_NM] [nvarchar] (30)		-- Order.
	[SO_NM] [nvarchar] (30)			-- Suborder.
	[FAM_NM] [nvarchar] (30)		-- Family.
	[SF_NM] [nvarchar] (30)			-- Subfamily.
	[REMARKS] [ntext]
	[FAMILYDESCR] [ntext]			-- Family description.
	[AUTHOR] [nvarchar] (255)		-- Author of family description.
	[ADDRESS] [ntext]	
	[ACKNOWLEDGE] [ntext]
	[ClassNum] [int]				-- Class number.
	[OrderNum] [decimal](4, 2)		-- Order number.
	[SuborderNum] [decimal](4, 2)	-- Suborder number.
	[FamilyNum] [decimal](6, 2)		-- Family number.
	[SubfamilyNum] [int]			-- Subfamily number.
	[TimeStamp] [datetime]


REFERENC
	[CAS_REF_NO] [int] 				-- Unique identifying number.
	[NAME_1] [nvarchar] (25)  		-- First author's last name.
	[INIT_1] [nvarchar] (20) 		-- First author's first and middle initials.
	[NAME_2] [nvarchar] (25) 		-- Second author's last name.
	[INIT_2] [nvarchar] (20) 		-- Second author's first and middle initials.
	[ADD_AUTH] [nvarchar] (60) 		-- Additional authors.
	[YR] [nvarchar] (10) 			-- Year of publication.
	[MONTH_DAY] [nvarchar] (30) 	-- Month and day of publication.
	[TITLE] [ntext] 				-- Title of publication.
	[JOUR] [nvarchar] (7) 			-- Ignore.
	[JOUR_NAME] [nvarchar] (120) 	-- Ignore.
	[CITATION] [nvarchar] (30) 		-- Volume, etc. of publication.
	[PP] [nvarchar] (100) 			-- Page numbers on which publication appears.
	[FIGS] [nvarchar] (30) 			-- Figures, illustrations, and plates in publication.
	[CAS_CALLNUM] [nvarchar] (50) 	-- CAS Library call numbers.
	[ICH_CALLNUM] [nvarchar] (50) 	-- CAS-ICH Library call numbers.
	[ICH_REPRINT] [bit] 	
	[REMARKS1] [nvarchar] (160) 	
	[REMARKS2] [nvarchar] (255) 	
	[STATREF_GEN] [bit] 			
	[STATREF_SP] [bit] 	
	[BY] [nvarchar] (5) 	
	[DATEBY] [smalldatetime]	
	[AVAIL] [nvarchar] (1) 	
	[ENTERED] [nvarchar] (5) 	
	[DATEENTERED] [smalldatetime]	
	[PROOFED] [nvarchar] (5) 	
	[DATEPROOFED] [smalldatetime]	
	[JourID] [int]					-- Link to Journal table.
	[TimeStamp] [datetime]
	
JOURNAL
	[JourID] [int]					-- Unique identifying number.
	[JOUR] [nvarchar] (7)			-- Journal acronym.
	[JOUR_NAME] [nvarchar] (60)		-- Abbreviated journal name.
	[FULL_NAME] [nvarchar] (250)	-- Full journal name.
	[CALLNUMBER] [nvarchar] (50)	
	[NOTES] [nvarchar] (138)	
	[REMARKS] [nvarchar] (255)	
	[TimeStamp] [datetime]
</pre>