---
title: Data Jamboree 2/Annotation Experiment
---

===Background:===
The curation experiment was given to five curators on the third day of the [[Data_Jamboree_2/Agenda | second data jamboree]]. The goals of the experiment were to assess curation consistency among a group of new curators, and to identify areas of improvement in curator training, ontology development, and software improvement.

===Participant Training:===
Only one of the five curators had experience using Phenex prior to the data roundup.  Training for all curators consisted of:

* A hands-on, group curation exercise led and assisted by experienced curators given on the first day of the data roundup
* Two days of individual curation work on publications related to each participant's area of taxonomic expertise, with assistance from project personnel
* For reference, participants were given an [[Guide_to_Character_Annotation | Annotation Guide]] with examples of character types commonly encountered in the fish systematic literature

===Results:===

====Character Summary and Suggestions for Improvement====

''1. Presence or absence of intercalar: (0) present; (1) absent.3''
*Consistency: 5/5
*Summary: all curators annotated this character identically
''2. Opercle depth to width ratio: (0) less than two; (1) about two or greater than two. Essentially, this character distinguishes between those taxa with a short, relatively broad opercle and those with a tall relatively slender opercle.2''
*Consistency: 1/5
*Summary of variable annotations: 
**The majority of curators used various size qualities (e.g., increased width; decreased depth) to describe differences in shape.  
*Suggestions to improve consistency:
** Definitions of size terms need to be improved; also, size and it's children do not share a parent with shape. 
** Annotation of characters with detailed size information should be annotated to higher level (shape in this case).
'''''3.''' Number of unbranched plus branched pelvic-fin rays: (0) 11; (1) nine; (2) more than 11.3''
*Consistency: 3/5
*Summary of variable annotations:
**Increased count used as quality term for state 2 by one curator; this is OK because parent is_a count
**Incorrect entity chosen by two curators (pelvic fin actinotrichium instead of pelvic fin lepidotrichium)
**Quality and Count left blank by one curator
''4. Basihyal: (0) present and ossified; (1) present and cartilaginous; (2) absent.1''
*Consistency:
*Summary of variable annotations:
** most curators recorded both presence and absence of bone and cartilage terms for each state
** bone composition (cartilaginous vs. ossified) used by one curator for quality
*Suggestions and group discussion:
** for state 2: basihyal cartilage absent implies basihyal bone absent (because the latter develops from the former)
*** in fact it can also be that the cartilage is absent b/c it has developed into the bone (completely ossified)
*** hence need to add that basihyal is absent too
** graph view can be very helpful to visualize develops_from relationships
''5. Position of anterior margin of nasal: (0) falling short of lateral process of mesethmoid (= lateral ethmoid wing of Weitzman, 1962); (1) extending anteriorly to overlie or extend beyond lateral process of mesethmoid.3'' 
*Consistency: 1/5
*Summary:
**Incorrect entity (naris vs. nasal bone) used in post-composition
**Monadic qualty incorrectly used rather than relational quality
**Post-composed entity term chosen rather than approporiate pre-composed term
**Relational structural quality used rather than relational positional quality
*Suggestions:
** software should prevent filling in relative entities for qualities that aren't relational
** full text search of the definitions would be very useful
''6. Number of hypurals in upper lobe of caudal fin:  (0) four; (1) three.2''
*Consistency: 2/5
**Incorrect post-composition for entity (in various ways; see individual annotations below)
**Quality and Count left blank
**contained_in used for post-composition
*Suggestions:
**display definitions for relationship types (contained_in vs. part_of)
**hypural can also be "contained in" upper lobe of caudal fin
''7. Presence or absence of medially directed, spine-like process on ventral surface of post-temporal: (0) present; (1) absent.3''
*Consistency: 3/5
*Summary:
**post-composed entity incorrectly started with quality term 
**post-composed entity term lacking spatial information
*Suggestions:
** Software should ensure that entity starts with a spatial or anatomy term if post-composed, not a quality
''8. Presence or absence of contact between frontal and pterotic: (0) frontal and pterotic bones in contact; (1) pterotic excluded from contact with frontal by sphenotic.3''
*Consistency: 5/5 for state 0; 4/5 for state 1
*Summary:
**curator mistakenly(?) used same quality for both states
*Suggestions:
** Record free-text information not used in annotation in the comments field (e.g., sphenotic needs to go into the comment field)
''9. Orientation of infrapharyngobranchial 1: (0) proximal tip anteriorly directed; (1) proximal tip posteriorly directed.1''
*Consistency: 2/5
**monadic quality term used incorrectly (related entity used in annotation)
**less specific entity term used in post-composition (pharyngobranchial vs. pharyngobranchial 1)
**spatial term incorrectly used as quality term
**spatial term incorrectly used as related entity
*Suggestions:
** software should prevent filling in spatial or monadic terms for quality if related entity field is filled.
** if too complex to express the exact nature of the orientatin, then annotate quality as "orientation"
''10. Dermosphenotic (0) triangular; (1) triradiate; (2) tubular.1''
*Consistency: 5/5
**Summary: all curators annotated this character equivalently
**Discussion about approporiateness of tripartite for state 1

References:

1Hilton, EJ. 2003. Comparative osteology and phylogenetic systematics of fossil and living bony-tongue fishes (Actinopterygii, Teleostei, Osteoglossomorpha). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 137:1-100.

2Sanger, TJ and AR McCune. 2002. Comparative osteology of the Danio (Cyprinidae: Ostariophysi) axial skeleton with comments on Danio relationships based on molecules and morphology. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 135: 529-546. 

3Zanata AM and Vari RP. 2005. The family Alestidae (Ostariophysi, Characiformes): a phylogenetic analysis of a trans-Atlantic clade. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 145: 1-144.


====Comparison of Consistency Experiment I vs. II====
{| border="1" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="3"
! Character #
! # Participants with
Completed Annotations (n=4; Exp. I)
! % Consistency with Key (Exp. I)
! # Participants with
Completed Annotations (n=5; Exp. II)
! % Consistency with Key (Exp. II)
|-
| 1 || 4 || 100 || 5 || 100
|-
| 2 || 3 || 0  || 5 || 20 
|-
| 3 || 3 || 0  || 4 || 60
|-
| 4 || 4 || 0  || 5 ||
|-
| 5 || 3 || 33  || 5 || 20
|-
| 6 || 4 || 0  || 5 || 40
|-
| 7 || 4 || 50  || 5 || 60
|-
| 8 || 3 || 33  || 5 || 100
|-
| 9 || 3 || 0  || 5 || 40
|-
| 10 || 2 || 50  || 5 || 100
|-
| 
|}

====Raw data from participants====
* [[Media:Consistency-expt-II-rawdata.xls|download excel file]]

[[Category:Data Jamboree 2]]
[[Category:Curation]]