---
title: Data Jamboree 2
---

<center><big>'''Linking Evolution to Genomics Using Phenotype Ontologies:'''<br/>'''Second Morphology Data Jamboree'''</big><br/><br/>A workshop hosted by the National Evolutionary Synthesis Center (NESCent).</center>

==Location and Date==

'''Venue: South Dakota
'''<span class="plainlinks">[http://www.radisson.com/rapidcitysd/ Radisson Hotel, Rapid City]</span> (Sept. 27-29)
'''<span class="plainlinks">[http://www.custerresorts.com/sylvan-lake-lodge-custer-state-park-resort/ Sylvan Lake Lodge]</span>, South Dakota (Sept. 29-Oct.1)

'''Date:''' September 27-October 1, 2008

'''Organizers:''' Paula Mabee, Monte Westerfield, Todd Vision, and Hilmar Lapp

==Introduction==

Purpose:

# Evaluation of prototypes for web user interface
# Character data entry by experts; introduce new curators to Phenote and data entry; test/enhance curation consistency; further refine curation interface
# Project personnel meeting

==Agenda==

Draft at ''[[Data_Jamboree_2/Agenda]]'' for the program for each day.

==Resources==

For curators:
* [[Guide to Character Annotation]]
* [https://webdav.nescent.org/phenoscape-data/TaxonList_rev.doc Entering a taxon list]
* [https://webdav.nescent.org/phenoscape-data/group-exercise.doc Group exercise instructions]
* [[Phenote User Guide]] (this also contains detailed instructions for downloading and running Phenote)
* [[Resources for curators]]

==Logistics==

* <span class="plainlinks">[http://www.radisson.com/rapidcitysd/ Radisson Hotel, Rapid City]</span> (Sept. 27-29)
* <span class="plainlinks">[http://www.custerresorts.com/sylvan-lake-lodge-custer-state-park-resort/ Sylvan Lake Lodge]</span> (Sept. 29-Oct.1)
* [http://www.travelsd.com/about/events/buffaloroundup.asp Buffalo Roundup] (Sep 29)
* Travel agent: [mailto:Marybeth.Vlasman%40aaasd%2eorg Marybeth Vlasman] or [mailto:kristen.walker%40aaasd%2eorg Kristen Walker] at AAA travel

==Participants==

Members of the project team are in '''bold font'''.

{| border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="0"
|-
! Name !! Institution
{{EventParticipant|Balhoff|Jim|balhoff%40nescent%2eorg|NESCent|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Blake|Judith|jblake%40informatics%2ejax.org|The Jackson Laboratory|}}
{{EventParticipant|Grande|Terry|TGRANDE%40luc%2eedu|Loyola University, Chicago|}}
{{EventParticipant|Dahdul|Wasila|Wasila.Dahdul%40usd%2eedu|University of South Dakota and NESCent|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Engeman|Jeff|jeffrey%2eengeman%40usd%2eedu|University of South Dakota|}}
{{EventParticipant|Hilton|Eric|ehilton%40vims%2eedu|Virginia Institute of Marine Science|}}
{{EventParticipant|Kothari|Cartik|cartik%40nescent%2eorg|NESCent|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Lapp|Hilmar|hlapp%40nescent%2eorg|NESCent|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Lewis|Suzanna|lsuzi%40fruitfly2eorg |Berkeley Bioinformatics and Ontology Project|}}
{{EventParticipant|Lundberg|John|lundberg%40acnatsci%2eorg |Department of Ichthyology, Academy of Natural Sciences|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Mabee|Paula|pmabee%40usd%2eedu|University of South Dakota|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Mayden|Rick|cypriniformes@gmail.com|St. Louis University|}}
{{EventParticipant|Midford|Peter|petermidford%40yahoo%2ecom|Dept. of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Kansas|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Sabaj Pérez|Mark|sabaj%40acnatsci%2eorg|Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia|}}
{{EventParticipant|Vision|Todd|tjv%40bio%2eunc%2eedu|NESCent, and Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Westerfield|Monte|monte%40uoneuro%2euoregon%2eedu|Zebrafish Information Network (ZFIN) and Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon|'''}}
|}

==Papers for Annotation==
for more information on the papers below see: http://spreadsheets.google.com/ccc?key=pTeXfTnVPxC-P1URVHbI4Qg&hl=en

*Terry Grande (Gonorynchiformes and Ostariophysi)
**de Pinna, M. C. C., and T. Grande. 2003. Ontogeny of the accessory neural arch in pristigasteroid clupeomorphs and its bearing on the homology of the otophysan claustrum (Teleostei) Copeia 2003:838-845.
**Grande, T., and F. J. Poyato-Ariza. 1999. Phylogenetic relationships of fossil and Recent gonorynchiform fishes (Teleostei: Ostariophysi). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 125:197-238.
**Poyato-Ariza, F. J. 1996. A revision of the ostariophysan fish family Chanidae, with special reference to the Mesozoic forms. Palaeo Ichthyologica 6:1-52.

*Richard Mayden (Cypriniformes)
**Mayden, R. L. 1989. Phylogenetic studies of North American minnows, with emphasis on the genus Cyprinella (Teleostei: Cypriniformes). University of Kansas Museum of Natural History Miscellaneous Publications 80:1-189.
**Cavender, T. M., and M. M. Coburn. 1992. Phylogenetic relationships of North American Cyprinidae. Pp. 293-327 in R. L. Mayden, ed. Systematics, Historical Ecology, and North American Freshwater Fishes. Stanford University Press, Stanford.
**Conway, K. W., and R. L. Mayden. 2007. The gill arches of Psilorhynchus (Ostariophysi: Psilorhynchidae) Copeia 2007: 267–280 

*Eric Hilton (Clupeiformes and Ostariophysi)
**Chang, M-M; Maisey, J G (2003)
**Arratia, G. 1999. The monophyly of Teleostei and stem-group teleosts.  Consensus and disagreements. Pp. 265-334 in G. Arratia, and H.-P. Schultze, eds. Mesozoic Fishes 2- Systematics and Fossil Record. Verlag Dr. F. Pfeil, Munchen.
**Fink, S. V.; Fink, W. L. (1996) (review first pass by Wasila Dahdul)

*Mark Sabaj Pérez (Siluriformes)
**De Pinna, M. C. C. 1993. Higher-level Phylogeny of Siluriformes (Teleostei: Ostariophysi), with a New Classification of the Order. City University of New York, New York.
**Mo, T. 1991. Anatomy, Relationships and Systematics of the Bagridae (Teleostei: Siluroidei) with a Hypothesis of Siluroid Phylogeny, Theses Zoologicae, 17, Koeltz, Koenigstein.
**De Pinna, M. C. C. 1996. A phylogenetic analysis of the Asian catfish families Sisoridae, Akysidae, and Amblycipitidae, with a hypothesis on the relationships of the neotropical Aspredinidae (Teleostei, Ostariophysi). Fieldiana: Zoology (New Series) 84:i–iv + 1-83.

==Background Reading==

* We use the tag "<span class="plainlinks">[http://www.connotea.org/tag/phenoscape phenoscape]</span>" on Connotea. Everyone is welcome to suggest references by using this tag.
* Relevant manuscripts by members of the project team:
# Mabee PM, Ashburner M, Cronk Q, Gkoutos GV, Haendel M, Segerdell E, Mungall C, and Westerfield M. Phenotype ontologies: the bridge between genomics and evolution. Trends Ecol Evol 2007 Jul; 22(7) 345-50. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2007.03.013 doi:10.1016/j.tree.2007.03.013]
# Mabee PM, Arratia G, Coburn M, Haendel M, Hilton EJ, Lundberg JG, Mayden RL, Rios N, and Westerfield M. Connecting evolutionary morphology to genomics using ontologies: a case study from Cypriniformes including zebrafish. J Exp Zoolog B Mol Dev Evol 2007 Jun 28. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jez.b.21181 doi:10.1002/jez.b.21181]
# Haendel, M.A., Neuhaus, F., Osumi-Sutherland, D.S., Mabee, P.M., Mejino J.L.V., Mungall, C.J., and Smith, B. (2008) [[Media:Caroreprint.pdf|CARO - The Common Anatomy Reference Ontology]]. ''In:'' Albert Burger, Duncan Davidson and Richard Baldock (Editors): ''Anatomy Ontologies for Bioinformatics: Principles and Practice''. ISBN 978-1-84628-884-5.

[[Category:Data Jamboree 2]]