---
title: Data Jamboree 2/Agenda
---

Agenda for the 2nd Phenoscape Data Jamboree and Project Meeting, held in South Dakota:
== Saturday, Sept. 27 ==
''Travel day for participants and project personnel''
* Fly into Rapid City, South Dakota (Paula & co. will pick you up at airport)
* Meet for dinner (at the Firehouse) and overnight at Radisson hotel, Rapid City

== Sunday, Sept. 28 ==

* 8:00 am: Phenoscape Introduction (Paula); project personnel and participant introductions
* 8:30 am: Synthetic research databases for model organisms (Monte Westerfield)
* 8:45 am: Phenotype-genotype relationships in the mouse (MGI) database: Judy Blake
* 9:00 am: Mining phenotypes annotated using entity-quality syntax: Suzi Lewis
* 9:15 am: Phenex introduction (Jim Balhoff)
* 9:30 am: Curation Exercise (Wasila Dahdul)
* 10:30 am: '''''Coffee break''''' (15 min)
* 10:45 am: Data curation: work on individual data
* 12:00 pm: '''''Lunch'''''
* 1:00 pm: Data curation: work on individual data
* 3:00 pm: '''''Coffee break''''' (15 min)
* 3:15 pm: Phenoscape user interface introduction (Jim Balhoff)
* 5:00 pm: Wrap up and discussion of curation issues
* 6:00 pm: Dinner in Rapid City (Botticellis)

== Monday, Sept. 29 ==
* 5:00 am: Check out; drive to Buffalo roundup
* 6:00 am: Buffalo roundup - participants driven to [http://www.sdgfp.info/Parks/Regions/Custer/round.htm Custer State Park] (~45 min)
* 12:00 pm: '''Lunch at roundup'''
* 1:00 pm: Drive to Sylvan lake lodge, check in
* 2:00 pm: Data curation: work on individual data; begin individual meetings with Cartik, Hilmar, and Todd to look at mock-ups (web-based and paper) of Phenoscape user interface.
* 7:00 pm: Dinner at Sylvan Lodge

== Tuesday, Sept. 30 ==
* 8:00 am: [[WG:All-Hands_Meeting_30Sep08|Project personnel meeting agenda]] concurrent with Data curation
*9:45 am: '''''Coffee break'''''
*10:00 am: Curation consistency experiment (1 hr) concurrent with Project personnel meeting
* 11:00 am: Review and discussion of consistency experiment (Project personnel and curators present)
* 12:00 pm: '''''Lunch'''''
* 1:00 pm: Project personnel meeting concurrent with Data curation
* 3:00 pm: '''''Coffee break'''''
*3:15 pm:  Project personnel meeting concurrent with Data curation
* 4:30 pm: Leave for dinner
* 5:00 pm: Dinner at the Alpine Inn (Hill City)
* 6:30 pm: Leave Hill City to go to Mt. Rushmore for lighting ceremony (at 8:00 pm, with time to look around from 7-8)

== Wednesday, Oct. 1==
* 8:00 am: Data curation
* 10:00 am: Coffee & begin to wrap up discussion
* 12:00 pm: Participants depart (transportation to Rapid City airport provided)

[[Category:Data Jamboree 2]]