---
title: Fish Evolution Working Group
permalink: wiki/Fish_Evolution_Working_Group
layout: wiki
tags:
 - Community
---

This project arose from a [Working Group at
NESCent](http://www.nescent.org/science/workinggroup.php) led by Paula
Mabee and Monte Westerfield. Goals and summaries of the meetings of the
group are below.

## **Towards an Integrated Database for Fish Evolution**: A NESCent Working Group

Model systems provide a way to untangle complex problems. Often concepts
worked out in organisms such as fruit flies or frogs can be applied to
other systems, including humans. Zebrafish have become a primary model
for studying developmental genetics and evolutionary developmental
biology, or "EvoDevo". Ichthyologists (fish biologists) have also
studied zebrafish, among other cypriniforms (generally small, tropical
fish like minnows, barbs, carps and goldfish), to understand their
evolutionary relationships. Groups that work on the same organism, but
from different viewpoints can learn a lot from each other and
potentially advance their science dramatically by combining their
information. However, developmental biologists and fish evolutionists
have not historically interacted to a great extent, and generally have
not "spoken the same language", making collaboration and interaction
challenging.

This working group brings together members of the zebrafish research
community (including those involved with the Zebrafish Information
Network - [ZFIN](http://zfin.org)) and the Cypriniform research
community (including those involved with the Cypriniform Tree of Life,
or [CToL](http://bio.slu.edu/mayden/cypriniformes/home.html), project)
with the goal of linking information from both fields. The group
proposes to join databases to combine the genetic information from
developmental biology with the morphological data from evolutionary
biology. One of the key challenges for this group is finding a common
language, since every field has its own jargon and the same term can
mean different things in different fields. One way of accomplishing this
is by using ontologies, which are hierarchical constrained vocabularies.
Another challenge will be determining how best to use the available
data. What kinds of information would be most useful? How should one
kind of information be linked to another? The group will tackle the
logistics of developing such a database, from basic data entry curation
through programming, beginning with a prototype.

The Fish Database Workgroup had their first meeting at NESCent November
4-7, 2005. The focus of our second meeting from April 9 to 11 was on
tying homology relationships into anatomy, taxonomy, and phylogeny
ontologies. We began technical discussions of developing taxonomy
ontologies and how to reference anatomy using such ontologies. We talked
through the coding of multiple systematic characters using two
ontologies (Anatomy and PATO).

## Working Group resources

*Note that these may be specific to the working group and its
participants, and hence most of these links may not be public.*

- <a href="WG:Working_Group_Participants" class="wikilink"
  title="Table of participants">Table of participants</a>
- <a href="WG:Meeting_Information" class="wikilink"
  title="Meeting information">Meeting information</a> such as hotel,
  transportation, etc.
- <a href="WG:Agenda" class="wikilink" title="Meeting agendas">Meeting
  agendas</a>

### Mailing list

The mailing list for the working group is hosted by NESCent. You can
send email to all meeting participants by posting to
\[[mailto:wg-](mailto:wg-)%40nescent%2eorg wg-@nescent.org\]. The URL
for the mailing list archive is
\[<https://lists.nescent.org/mailman/private/wg->/
<https://lists.nescent.org/mailman/private/wg->/\]. You will need to
login with your email and password to view the archives. The initial
password is randomly generated and can be retrieved through the
\[<https://lists.nescent.org/mailman/listinfo/wg-> subscription
information page\]. Enter your email address with which you are
subscribed into the field at the bottom of the page and click the button
next to it labeled 'Unsubscribe or edit options'. The next page will
have a button to have the system email you your password.

## Local Links

Hotel  

- [Millenium
  Hotel](http://www.millenniumhotels.com/MCIL.nsf/LU_HOTELDOC/113$$HotelDescription?OpenDocument)

Dining & Entertainment  

- [Ninth Street](http://www.ninthst.com/) (right across from NESCent)

Historic  

- [Erwin Mills](http://www.owdna.org/mill.htm)
