---
title: KB-OWL
---

This page describes the data model, data loading process, and query methods being developed for a new version of the Phenoscape Knowledgebase built on top of RDF and making use of standard OWL reasoners.

==Data model==
===Phenotypes===
Phenotypes in the new data model are modeled as OWL class expressions. They are now constructed in an inverse fashion from the form in the original KB — rather than describing classes of particular qualities which inhere in particular structures, we describe parts which bear particular qualities (at the level of instance data the model is the same: ''inheres_in'' is the inverse of ''bearer_of'').

For example, "serrated dorsal fin":
* '''old:''' ''exhibits'' some (serrated and ''inheres_in'' some dorsal_fin)
* '''new:''' ''has_part'' some (dorsal_fin and ''bearer_of'' some serrated)

We can now model absence correctly. The previous version of the KB used a quality class called 'absent' in a way which produces unintended inferences. In the new model we use universal quantification with negation. For "dorsal fin, absent":
* ''has_part'' only (not dorsal_fin)

For a localized absence we would use a nested ''has_part'':
* ''has_part'' some (head and ''has_part'' only (not scale))

The ''has_part'' formulation also provides the benefit of automatic "present" inferences for structures used in any phenotype, not just "present" phenotypes.

===Taxa and phenotype annotations===
Taxa in the new data model are modeled as OWL individuals, rather than OWL classes. Thus, the taxonomic hierarchy is represented directly in RDF as a tree of ''subclade_of'' property relationships between taxa, rather than OWL subclass axioms. This model allows for richer modeling of how phenotypes are propagated due to taxon membership and ancestral states than a class-based taxonomy ([http://www.mendeley.com/download/public/2280031/4561422715/faae92a74742bc35ceca9b3f5862cb94a4cde61e/dl.pdf]).

A given phenotype expression (''has_part'' some ...) describes the condition of an individual organism, not a whole taxon. So to create a phenotype annotation for a taxon, the relationship of this organism to the taxon must be captured. We use one of two forms, [[Semantics_of_phenotype_annotations|depending on the intended meaning]]:
* '''Observation annotation:''' ''has_member'' some (''has_part'' some (dorsal_fin and ''bearer_of'' some serrated))
* '''Ancestral state annotation:''' ''has_progenitor'' some (''has_part'' some (dorsal_fin and ''bearer_of'' some serrated))

The actual phenotype annotation can be created as a class assertion axiom for the given taxon:
* Ictalurus_punctatus Type (''has_member'' some (''has_part'' some (dorsal_fin and ''bearer_of'' some serrated)))

===Genes and phenotype annotations===

==Reasoning==

==Data loader==

==Data store==