---
title: KB build process
---

''Still being fleshed out''

The Phenoscape KB build process goes through several steps in converting input data sources to a queryable knowledgebase. This page provides some description for each of the steps, most or all of which are implemented in the [https://github.com/phenoscape/phenoscape-owl-tools phenoscape-owl-tools] project.

==OWL conversion==
The Phenoscape Knowledgebase works as a single unified OWL model. While some inputs (e.g. the shared ontologies such as [http://uberon.org/ Uberon] and [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/pato PATO]) are natively distributed as OWL documents, others are converted to OWL from some other representation. In doing so the inputs are, as far as possible, converted to a shared data model. EQ annotations are converted to a specific semantic representation.
===Examples===
* ZFIN phenotype annotations are provided at [http://zfin.org/downloads their data download site]. We translate each row into a phenotype instance: an individual instance of some PATO quality. Here are the column headers from the ZFIN website, followed by representative OWL syntax (referencing column numbers where actual URI values would be, and somewhat casual with other identifiers):

<table class="summary1">
<tr>
<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">1</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">2</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">3</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">4</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">5</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">6</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">7</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">8</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">9</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">10</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">11</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">12</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">13</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">14</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">15</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">16</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">17</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">18</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">19</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">20</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">21</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">22</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">23</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">24</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">25</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF; text-align: center">26</td>

</tr>
<tr>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Gene Symbol</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Gene ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Affected Structure or Process 1 subterm ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Affected Structure or Process 1 subterm Name</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Post-composed Relationship ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Post-composed Relationship Name</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Affected Structure or Process 1 superterm ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Affected Structure or Process 1 superterm Name</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Phenotype Keyword ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Phenotype Keyword Name</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Phenotype Tag</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Affected Structure or Process 2 subterm ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Affected Structure or Process 2 subterm name</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Post-composed Relationship (rel) ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Post-composed Relationship (rel) Name</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Affected Structure or Process 2 superterm ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Affected Structure or Process 2 superterm name</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Genotype ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Genotype Display Name</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Knockdown Reagent ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Start Stage ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">End Stage ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Genotype Environment ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Publication ID</td>

<td style="font-weight: bold; background-color: #CCFFFF;">Figure ID</td>

</tr>
</table>

  Individual: <uuid_1>
    Types: ps:AnnotatedPhenotype, 
           <uuid_2>
    Facts: ps:associated_with_gene <col_3>,
           ps:associated_with_taxon NCBITaxon:zebrafish, 
           dc:source <col_26>
  
  Class: <uuid_2>
    SubClassOf: <col_10> and (inheres_in some (<col_4> and (<col_6> some <col_8>))) and (towards some (<col_13> and (<col_15> some <col_17>)))


* Annotations from other MODs are similarly structured; however some such as MGI use precoordinated phenotype classes instead of an EQ template. In that case, the phenotype instance is simply an instance of the stated [http://www.informatics.jax.org/searches/MP_form.shtml MP] phenotype term.

==Identifier cleanup==
Several common OWL properties (''part_of'', ''has_part'', ''develops_from'', etc.) are conceptually shared across ontology and annotation resources, facilitating data integration. However, unlike class identifiers, identifiers for properties are often not standardized and they may not properly reference shared terms (usually because of poor tool support rather than user intent). We maintain a [https://github.com/phenoscape/phenoscape-owl-tools/blob/master/src/main/scala/org/phenoscape/owl/PropertyNormalizer.scala table of "alternative" URIs] for common properties as we observe them in our data inputs. We could create equivalence axioms between these, but instead we just standardize all incoming content. This saves the reasoner some work and also makes it much easier to query across data using standard URIs, especially when not using a reasoner.

==Axiom generation==
==="Absence" classes for OWL EL negation classification workaround===
We model absence phenotypes as an instance of the quality [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0002000 lacks all parts of type] which ''inheres_in'' the [http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/UBERON_0000468 whole organism] and is ''towards'' a type, the class of structure that is absent, i.e. <code>''towards'' value '''X'''</code>. This approach allows us to have a phenotype class for the condition, but directly using a class as a property value in this way is outside of DL reasoning. So to classify our absence phenotypes, we also add an equivalence to <code>not (''has_part'' some '''X''')</code>. ''TODO—this should probably be'' <code>inheres_in some (not (''has_part'' some '''X'''))</code>. Because we are confined to using the ELK reasoner (for scalability reasons) class expressions using <code>not</code> will still not be classified. For this reason we must pregenerate an "absence" phenotype for each known anatomical structure. These generated classes are named in a standardized way so that they can be arranged into a hierarchy by the "Negation Hierarchy Asserter" ([[KB_build_process#Assertion_of_absence_hierarchy|below]]).

For more on modeling of absence phenotypes, see [[Absence Phenotypes in OWL]].

===SPARQL facilitation (e.g. materialized existential hierarchies such as part_of)===
==="EQ character" classes: combinations of anatomical entities and PATO attribute terms===

==Materialization of inferred axioms==
ELK reasoner using extracted tbox axioms only (not feasible with individuals included).

==Assertion of absence hierarchy==
Based on inverse of hierarchy of negated classes computed by ELK.

[[Category:Reasoning]]
[[Category:Database]]
[[Category:Informatics]]
[[Category:Identifiers]]
[[Category:Software]]