---
title: Knowledgebase
permalink: wiki/Knowledgebase
layout: wiki
tags:
 - Database
 - Informatics
 - Software
---

The [Phenoscape Knowledgebase](http://kb.phenoscape.org) (KB) is
Phenoscape's flagship online resource. It contains evolutionary
phenotype data from more than 150 comparative morphology studies,
currently with a focus on the vertebrate fin-to-limb transition and
comparative fish morphology. The KB offers programmable (API) access to
natural language phenotype descriptions annotated with formal ontologies
so that machines can understand and compute with the semantics of
descriptions at scale. Using shared ontologies for morphological,
spatial, and other requisite domain knowledge, the KB links these data
to phenotypes reported in genetic perturbation studies for pertinent
model organisms (zebrafish and mouse), and to human genetic disease
phenotypes.

For query answering the KB uses machine reasoning to match data by its
semantics. The API also gives access to other machine reasoning-based
algorithms. These include synthesizing characters and states that are
implied by but not expressly asserted in the original studies; and
finding evolutionary phenotype transitions semantically similar to gene
phenotypes.

Further details, including relevant publications, KB data model, and API
documentation can be found at [Learning about the
KB](https://github.com/phenoscape/KB-DataFest-2017/wiki/Learning-about-the-KB).
