---
title: Links
---

<!-- ''Note: We suggest you consider using [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_bookmarking Social Bookmarking] for creating larger lists of links, as those you add here can't be searched by semantic tags. Popular sites include [http://www.citeulike.org/ CiteUlike], [http://www.connotea.org/ Connotea] and [http://del.icio.us del.icio.us].'' -->

==Links relevant to the project==

===Ontologies===

'''[http://www.bioontology.org National Center for Biomedical Ontology]'''
* [http://www.bioontology.org/ncbo/faces/pages/ontology_list.xhtml Ontologies from NCBO]
* [http://obofoundry.org/cgi-bin/detail.cgi?id=zebrafish_anatomy&title=Zebrafish%20anatomy%20and%20development Ontology of Zebrafish Anatomy and Development]
* [http://obofoundry.org/cgi-bin/detail.cgi?caro Common Anatomy Reference Ontology (CARO)] ([http://purl.org/obo/owl/CARO also available in OWL format])
* [http://www.bioontology.org/wiki/index.php/CL:Aligning_species-specific_anatomy_ontologies_with_CL Maintaining inter-ontology relations between species specific anatomy ontologies and CL/GO/CARO]
* [http://www.fruitfly.org/~cjm/obd/formats.html OBD Phenotype file formats] - Includes standards and schemas for PhenoSyntax and PhenoXML

'''Data typed using phenotype ontology'''
* [http://www.phenotypeontology.org/phenotype_annotation/ OBD data and schema downloads]

===Fish resources===

* [http://www.zfin.org Zebrafish Information Network] (ZFIN) 
* [http://www.deepfin.org/ DeepFin] 
* [http://www.digitalfishlibrary.org/ Digital Fish Library]  
* [http://www.calacademy.org/RESEARCH/ichthyology/catalog/fishcatsearch.html Catalog of Fishes]  
* [http://fishbase.org/ FishBase] 

===Morphology image database resources===

* [http://www.morphbank.net/ Morphbank]
* [http://morphobank.geongrid.org/ MorphoBank]  
* [http://digimorph.org/ Digimorph]  
* [http://aug.csres.utexas.edu/PhylogenyWiki/ Morphster]

===Software===

* [http://www.phenote.org Phenote]
* [http://oboedit.org/ OBO-Edit]

==Bibliography==

We also maintain a list of references on [http://www.connotea.org Connotea], using the tag "[http://www.connotea.org/tag/phenomap phenomap]". This list may be more up-to-date than the bibliography below.

Anyone can easily recommend references (and in fact any site or resource) to us simply by tagging it with "phenomap" in Connotea.

===Reprints===

* Haendel, M.A., Neuhaus, F., Osumi-Sutherland, D.S., Mabee, P.M., Mejino J.L.V., Mungall, C.J., and Smith, B. (2008) [[Media:Caroreprint.pdf|CARO - The Common Anatomy Reference Ontology]]. ''In:'' Albert Burger, Duncan Davidson and Richard Baldock (Editors): ''Anatomy Ontologies for Bioinformatics: Principles and Practice''. ISBN 978-1-84628-884-5.
* Mabee PM et al (2007a). [[Media:TREE Mabee.pdf|Phenotype ontologies: the bridge between genomics and evolution.]] Trends Ecol Evol <cite>mabee2007a</cite>
* Mabee PM et al (2007b). [[Media: JEZ Mabee.pdf|Connecting evolutionary morphology to genomics using ontologies: a case study from Cypriniformes including zebrafish.]] J Exp Zoolog B Mol Dev Evol. <cite>mabee2007b</cite>
* Schulz et al (2007). [http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/8/134 Spatial location and its relevance for terminological inferences in bio-ontologies.] BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:134 [http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-8-134 doi:10.1186/1471-2105-8-134]

===References===
<biblio>
#mabee2007a pmid=17416439
#mabee2007b pmid=17599725
#rosen1974 Rosen DE. 1974. ''[http://hdl.handle.net/2246/606 Phylogeny and zoogeography of salmoniform fishes and relationships of Lepidogalaxias salamandroides].'' Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 153:267-325.
#finkfink1981 Fink SV, Fink WL. 1981. ''Interrelationships of the ostariophysan fishes (Teleostei)''. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 72(4):297-353.
#finkfink1997 Fink, S.V. and W.L. Fink. 1997. Interrelationships of the Ostariophysi. In: ''Interrelationships of Fishes'', M. Stiassney, L. Parenti and D. Johnson (Eds). Academic Press, 209-249. 
</biblio>