---
title: Matching Phenotypes
---

This page discusses the method developed and implemented in late 2010 for search for, and scoring, phenotype matches between taxa (Phenoscape) and zebrafish mutants (ZFIN).
= Purpose =

An important goal for the Phenoscape project is to be able to suggest candidate genes that may have contributed to evolutionary change.  The way that we have proposed to do this is to search for changes in phenotype that appear as the result of mutations in model organisms and also appear as phenotype changes on an evolutionary tree.

= Selecting Phenotypes from Taxon Annotations =

The matching process involves matching ''changes'' in phenotype, not directly matching phenotypes.  For phenotypes associated with mutants of model organism mutants, it is understood that they vary with respect to the wild type.  For taxa, however, this means looking for taxonomic nodes where variation in a phenotype is observed among the children of the node.  For example, there are nine species within the genus ''Aspidoras'' with annotations for the shape of the opercle bone.  Of these, eight exhibit opercle bones with round shape, but the ninth (''A. pauciradiatus'') is annotated with a triangular opercle.  In contrast, all three annotated species of the related ''Hoplosternum'' are annotated with a triangular opercle.  Thus there is detectable variation in opercle shape within the children of ''Aspidoras'', but not within  ''Hoplosternum'' - suggesting that change in opercle shape has occurred somewhere among the descendants of ''Aspidoras''.  Once changes are identified, they treated as variation in the affected entity at the level of the attribute parent of the qualities involved (e.g., shape).

Formally, variation is inferred by taking the set of all phenotypes in child taxa that share the entity and have qualities that are subsumed by the same attribute (a quality that comes from the set of attribute qualities defined ...).

However, identifying variation also requires propagation of phenotype sets up the hierarchy.  Continuing with the previous example, what variation could be assigned to the family-level parent of Aspidoras, Callichthyidae.  Variation will depend on the phenotypes assigned to each genus in the family and how those are propagated to the family.

= Using attributes to limit the scope of quality comparisons =

Because the interest is in change in phenotype, phenotypes 'reduced' to a change in an attribute of an anatomical entity, not a particular quality of a phenotype.  Subsuming qualities all the way to their attributes is not, in principle, necessary (for example, round and triangular are subsumed by 2-D shape), using a consistent set of subsumers simplifies the matching process.

Therefore, matching phenotypes is reduced to matching the entity component of changes that have a common attribute (so shape changes and color changes will never be matched).

ZFIN and Phenoscape use different (though partially overlapping) sets of qualities (from the PATO ontology) in constructing phenotype annotations.

= Scoring matches of individual phenotypes =

Each phenotype is linked to multiple entities via ''inheres_in_part_of'' relations.  This relation holds between the entity in the phenotype as well as its ''is_a'' and ''part_of'' parents.  The reasoner infers the closure of this relation, which means the KB contains inferred ''inheres_in_part_of'' relations between the entity and all the ''is_a'' and ''part_of'' parents of the entity in the phenotype.

Matching requires based on building a set of class expressions, subsumed by quality, that subsume the phenotype.  This set of class expressions include all the phenotypes formed from an entity from the set of ''inheres_in_part_of'' parents and a quality that subsumes the quality specified in the phenotype.  It also includes the quality terms that are subsumers (via ''is_a'') of the quality in the phenotype.  Because this set includes both phenotype expressions and qualities, it is best seen as a set of class expressions.

The actual matching consists of taking the sets of subsuming class expressions from each of the phenotypes to be matched and forming the intersection, which is the set of common subsumers.  Each of these subsuming expressions can be assigned an information content (IC).  The match is scored as the IC of the common subsumer with the highest information content.

Note that under this scheme, an exact match may still score poorly if the selected common subsumer refers to an entity is high up in the anatomy hierarchy.  For example round ''inheres_in'' bone matched against itself will have a lower score than straight ''inheres_in'' neural spine 1 against curved ''inheres_in'' neural spine 2 because the latter two share the subsumer straight ''inheres_in'' neural spine which will have a higher information content than round ''inheres_in'' bone.

= Scoring matches of sets of phenotypes (phenotypic profiles) associated with a gene or taxon node =

The Washington et al. (2009) paper used four measures to assess similarity in phenotype profiles (sets of phenotypes associated with a gene).  These are:
*maxIC - the greatest IC of any pair of phenotypes in the set of pairs of phenotypes where one is drawn from the taxon set and other from the gene set.
*ICCS - each taxon phenotype is matched against all gene phenotypes and the highest IC value among the matches for each taxon phenotype is collected.  The final score is the mean of these highest matches.
*simIC - The sum of the IC values for each pair of matching phenotypes (e.g., phenotypes that share attributes) is divided by the sum of the IC values for each phenotype (in either taxon or gene profile) individually (currently implemented as matching the phenotype against itself).  C. Mungall (''pers comm'') indicates that this metric is symmetric.
*simJ - The number of shared phenotypes is divided the sum of the number of phenotypes in each set.  Note: the numerator could be either the number of exact matches (e.g, at the level of qualities) or matches at the level of attribute (exact match entity, qualities have common attribute).

Although these seem appropriate for scoring similarity of phenotype profiles associated with genes, it is less clear that they are appropriate for comparing phenotype profiles associated with changes between taxa (or phylogenetic change).

= Information Content as a metric of term relatedness =

== Alternatives ==
Because of its dependence on the set of annotations, there is a real concern that IC may not be the most appropriate measure of similarity between terms an ontology with associated annotations.