---
title: Neglected items
---

This is a list of various items that have come up at meetings and other discussions, which don't seem to have made it onto any development plan or roadmap.

===Measurement value literals in OBD (including ranges)===
Phenotypes that include a measurement are now stored without the measurement in OBD, for example "count" or "length" phenotypes.  In Phenex, the user can choose a quality such as "length" for a phenotype, as in "basihyal bone" "length".  The user can also input a literal numeric length in the measurement field (such as "11.5"), and also choose a unit from the unit ontology (such as "millimeters").  These values are not imported into OBD by the data loader.

===Measurement input interface supporting ranges for Phenex===
Phenex supports input of a single number for measurements.  Many publications provide ranges, which may or may not be bounded on both sides ("5-10", "more than 7").

===Fully automated dataloader script===
The dataloader should run in an automated way on a server.  It should be easy to install and run from any computer. ''I know Cartik is working on this but I'm not sure it's on a roadmap. --[[User:Jpb15|jim]] 15:53, 19 February 2009 (EST)'' ''This is a high-priority item, in fact. The fact that it doesn't appear to be does indicate that it needs to be explicitly documented as such. --[[User:Hlapp|Hilmar]] 18:37, 19 February 2009 (EST)''

===Polymorphic matrix states in Phenex===
Data matrices sometimes use the NEXUS format for specifying polymorphic states.  NeXML supports polymorphic state assignments, but Phenex doesn't provide any facilities for working with polymorphic states.

===Search for phenotypes in web interface via anatomy part_of===
Currently the web interface and data service provide results using the is_a subsumption relation - searching for "bone" will return annotations to any particular bone.  However we have not added a way to search for annotations to parts of some anatomical entity.  This should already be supported by OBD - needs to be added to our query services and web interface.

===Employing homology statements in data queries (via reasoning?)===
We need to determine and explicitly document how homology annotations will impact reasoning related to phenotype annotation searches.  ''Phone call scheduled for April 2, 2009 to discuss --[[User:Pmabee@usd.edu|Pmabee@usd.edu]] 15:53, 31 March 2009 (EDT)''

==="Systematic character" PATO subset===
At the SICB 2009 meeting we discussed choosing a set of terms from PATO that would represent the "character attributes" we will standardly use to group phenotypes in a character matrix (in the web interface, for example).  This subset should "bisect" the PATO ontology: any term should either be a descendant of, an ancestor of, or be, one and only one term in the systematic character slim.  ''I believe Wasila and Paula have this on their agenda. --[[User:Jpb15|jim]] 16:15, 19 February 2009 (EST)'' Wasila & Paula proposed a list of PATO terms; Jim incorporated into new version of Phenote 3/20/09--[[User:Pmabee@usd.edu|Pmabee@usd.edu]] 15:53, 31 March 2009 (EDT)

[[Category:Informatics]]