---
title: Ontology workflow
---

ZigVersion is the SVN client we use for keeping local copies of ontologies on your computer synchronized with those in the SVN (SubVersion server)
* Note: we will start using SmartSVN because ZigVersion is no longer being developed or maintained.

General workflow; begin each day by:
Starting up Zigversion and connect to repository

For ontology editing, use the “Vocab” URL in Zigversion. “Vocab” folder contains ontology files for OBO-Edit.
Select the top-level folder named with a forward slash (/)
Click "update" to download recent versions of files to your local, working folder

Within OBO-edit, open the local copy of your file and proceed with your curation work.
After saving your file, go back to ZigVersion and “check in” your modified file(s) to the repository. Remember to add a comment to the bottom of the check in window describing the changes you made to the file.

Wasila uses SmartCVS as the CVS client for obtaining local copies of ontologies on the OBO CVS server.  Question: do all curators need this? Could also download ontologies directly from OBOFoundry and Phenoscape ontologies are kept in SVN.

====Making ontology updates using ZigVersion and OboEdit====
1. Start OboEdit. Go to File>Load ontologies.
	Select the correct “stored adapter settings” for the ontology you want to update
	Nizar will have VAO-edit and Amniote-draft settings saved
	Browse Path or URL will connect to the local copies of these ontologies
	Make sure “allow dangling references” is checked

4.  ID profile mismatch message: hit yes

5.  Make edits...

6.  When adding a new term, make sure a high ID number is assigned. If assigned number is XX:0000000, then fix the ID in the ID Manager panel under Metadata.  Click “+” to add new ID profile; Then hit gears button. Give Profile name (e.g., TAO) and Default rule (e.g., TAO:$sequence(7,0,9999999)$). Hit commit.

7. Saving to local file
File>Save as. Ignore non-fatal warnings.Create new “stored adapter settings” for your ontology.  In Tag filtering, uncheck “modification date”, “modified by”, “creation_date”, and “created_by”. 
Make sure “filter tags” and “allow dangling parents” are checked.
ID rules: select “Write originally loaded ID rules”
Hit OK, overwrite is OK.

8. Save to SVN repository
Open Zigversion
Navigate to ontology file and hit “View changes” to verify your updates
Hit “check in” and add a comment (e.g., “added new terms: scapula, coracoid) and hit check in.

Opening ontology files in OBO-Edit  -- 
1. Create new “Stored adaptor settings” for each ontology (e.g., VTO, VAO, AMAO)
2. Hit “+” button next to stored adapter settings field, and type in ontology name
3. Hit “add” button to specify the ontology file location; hit “browse” to find the file 

OORT for reasoning

Anatomy ontology call minutes, development plans
http://phenoscape.org/wiki/Anatomy_Ontology_Conf_calls

http://phenoscape.org/wiki/Ontologies

https://phenoscape.org/wiki/Project_Plan

Recent phenoscape-curators discussions:
http://sourceforge.net/mailarchive/forum.php?forum_name=phenoscape-curators

Open issues
- provenance documentation in ontologies
- terminology vs. ontology; use of synonyms (related; incorrect); produce ‘slim’ version of VAO/AMAO for archosaur group
- tracker items: see CARO tracker, VAO tracker, Uberon tracker