---
title: Phenex
---

==Importing matrix files and taxon lists into Phenex==
# In order to combine a taxon list created in Phenote with matrix data stored in a NEXUS file, both files need to use identical taxon names.  For the Phenote file, this is the value in "Publication Taxon" (NOT "Valid Taxon").  For the NEXUS file, this is the ordinary taxon name you can see and edit in Mesquite.  It is much easier if all the taxon names are made identical before you do the merge.
# First, open the  taxon list in Phenote and the NEXUS file in Mesquite.  Make sure all the taxon names you want to match are identical.  It is okay if the files don't have the same number of taxa - if there are more in the taxon list, the extra taxa will be added.  If there are fewer, you will just have some that don't get matched.
# Next, make sure that the character description field has some content (more than numerical).  If it is blank, it leads to an import error in current Phenex (1.4; 25 Aug 08).  Copying the free text character name from the publication pdf works well.  Pasting in the character state free text, however, works better in Phenex than Mesquite (because Mesquite doesn't return to next character in list after entering character states from previous character).
# While the NEXUS file is open in Mesquite, choose "File > Save File As..." and save a new copy of the NEXUS file.  Make sure you have the most recent copy of Mesquite.  This will ensure that Mesquite re-writes the NEXUS file using a modern format which is more likely to be successfully opened by Phenex.  Use this new copy of the NEXUS file for all subsequent steps.
# Launch Phenex.  Choose "File > Import NEXUS...".  Select your NEXUS file and open it.  Verify that all the data is imported as expected, including the matrix.
# Now choose "File > Merge > Tab-delimited Taxa...".  Select your taxon list file and open it.  The import will seem a little slow.  Verify that the taxa you loaded from your NEXUS file now have TTO terms associated with them under "Valid Taxon", and specimens in the specimens panel (assuming you had this data in your taxon list).
# If some taxa from the Phenote taxon list were not matched to existing taxa in Phenex, you will see them at the end of the list.  Also, these taxa would have only empty cell values in the matrix panel.  If you expected these taxa to match existing taxa, check the taxon names and start over.
# Save your Phenex data to a new file using "File > Save".  It is recommended to append ".xml" to the file name.
# NOTE: If your publication does not include a character X taxon matrix, you can Merge Tab-delimited Taxa to import the taxon list and then save as a .xml Phenex file. A matrix can be entered at some later point, either in Phenex or Jim is developing a matrix import feature.

==Merging EQ annotations from a tab-delimited file==
Using the menu item "File > Merge Tab-delimited Characters...", you can merge EQ annotations from a tab file into an existing data set. The "Character Number" and "State Number" columns are used to match a character (by index) and state (by symbol) in the existing data set.  If the index falls outside the current range of characters, a new character is appended to the existing data set.  If a state with the given symbol does not exist, a new state is appended to the given character.  The character and state labels in the tab file will overwrite any labels in the existing data set.

[[Category:Curation]]
[[Category:Informatics]]