---
title: Phenoscape Grant Renewal Workshop/Notes
---

== Phenoscape II: Tuesday, April 28, 1:00-5:30 ==
Participating: Phenoscape: Paula Mabee, Todd Vision, Monte Westerfield, Hilmar Lapp, Wasila Dahdul, Jim Balhoff, Cartik Kothari, Peter Midford, John Lundberg; Suzanna Lewis, Judy Blake, Peter Vize, Anne Maglia

* Will be extending the taxonomic scope to extant and extinct vertebrates
** Create an annotation database spanning the taxonomic scope and their anatomy ontologies
** Three multi-species anatomy ontologies are being developed: teleosts, amphibians, mammalian anatomy
** Tree mapping: show when an evolutionary phenotype first appeared
* EQ support in all involved model organism databases
** Structure of MP is not consistent with anatomy, or with PATO
** Mapping from MP to EQ syntax is being worked on (George Gkoutos)
*** How is this supported in MGI?
**** Could spit back EQ, but could not allow users to search
** MGI isn't in a position to use EQ internally, but for example Phenoscape II could provide an EQ-view on mouse phenotypes, using the decomposition of MP into anatomy (or entity) and quality term cross-product
** Full EQ annotation for OMIM is being planned but not yet funded
** MGI, Xenbase, and ZFIN all have links from their phenotype data to OMIM
* Phenoscape II: Development of anatomy - new queries supported; would generate testable hypotheses; how exactly do those queries rely on developmental data?
** Different approaches between MGI and ZFIN:
*** MGI uses complete anatomy at different developmental stages
*** ZFIN uses one anatomy ontology and adds start and end dates to indicate the developmental period during which it appears (adult structures don't have an end date)
*** Xenbase uses the ZFIN approach
** Candidate genes for evolutionary change could be derived from anatomy-annotated gene expression studies during development; Where do mouse and Xenopus share gene sets in early development?
*** genes responsible for or associated with morphological changes during individual development could be candidates for evolutionary change
*** evolutionary phenotype changes could be used to query morphological changes during development
** Can we enable queries to generate hypotheses based on ontogeny reflecting evolutionary history?
** Powerful tool in interpreting microarray data downstream from node; know candidate genes without mutants using this approach
** See phenotypic differences between 2 taxa – where do you see similar changes?
** Cell types and associate with time and space – can reason from, neural crest, etc.

*** Evolutionary developmental data could come from medaka, stickleback
* Sequence of steps:
*# Ontology building
*#* Adult phenotype annotations for mutants in Xenbase
*#* Presently only 3 species for amphibians: Xenopus, Dermophis, Salamandria (integration beginning in July; phenotypes/mutants, adulta; L. Zimmerman (GB))
*#* Development decoupling from anatomy ontology in mouse (as per above)
*#** Requirements:
*#*** QC required – 1 person to find orphans and generate reports (80% complete); make decisions
*#*** 1st: alignment of MP and mouse anatomy, then QC of MP-EQ; use Mouse anatomy to initalize Paul’s ontology
*#*** 2nd: Mouse staging-> ZFIN + Xenbase style
*#*** Phenoscape II: Time required for above (1st and 2nd) is 1 person over 3 years
*#* Expanding mammalian anatomy to include extinct species
*#*** Judy mentioned Fiona McCarthy (chick ontology? Judy will ask)
*#* Anatomy for amniotes (the clade including mouse and dinosaurs), including extinct taxa (such as dinosaurs)
*#** Scope of this could be overwhelming
*#** Should be strongly driven (or staged) according to the character matrices to be annotated
*#** Chicken anatomy could provide a starting point?
*#** There is work on bird anatomy that uses a latin naming scheme
*#** Work on any smaller-scope anatomy (or multi-species anatomy) ontology will contribute terms that apply more broadly
*#** There may not be very many neomorphs between birds and mammals, though there are a few areas such as the digits in birds where the exact homology relationships aren't as clearly agreed upon.
*#** set up ontology and extend to fossils that Paul knows best;
*#** also need taxonomy onotlogy (from suprageneric filemaker database?)
*# Mammalian phenotype decomposition
*#* Need support for QC'ing the results of automated decomposition
*#* Alignment of MP with mouse anatomy
*# Annotation
*#* Which published character matrices are there for dinosaurs?
* Ontology mapping and alignment
** Need to align teleost and amphibian anatomy to mouse.
** Mouse and chicken need to be mapped to amniote anatomy. Mouse is a better start because there are genetic data.
* Paul Sereno gave short presentation on reconciling character-derived trees and character definition and use between different matrices and trees that share taxa
** [http://taxonsearch.org TaxonSearch]
** Formalizing and generating grammar of character coding and character state definition
*** Phenoscape II grant activity could be to produce EQ primer
** presented summaries of annotations, by region, by authors, by structure, by quality
** Paul’s question: Why are 2 trees different? A: Particular characters and types of coding; If you are trying to develop a consensus tree – can see how authors’ differ
** Analyzing character usage (shared, not shared, rejected) between trees that share taxa
** Conflicting phylogenies for the same set of taxa often turn out to be based on character codings that are not consistent or not compatible
** need to not only curate legacy data but be proactive in terms of syntax etc. of future data; use cases looking forward; morphology in crisis, wallowing in a sea of data
* Re: direct submission --Monte: ZFIN has 6,000 users, but 4-5 labs do direct submission of a lot of data; he suggested Phenex modified as a web tool to put in data; also ontology modification/use of Mesquite
== ==
* Miscellaneous discussion following above (Tuesday pm)
* Open to communities
** Phenoscape has public data, but can upload private data and use visualization tool
** working environment enabling exploration of data for analysis
** would allow people temporarily to overlay on whole data store

* NCBI blast similarity – phenoblast
** Will need term tracker
** Monte: Issue of best practice for global size/shape
** Todd: (here is forest of EQs that match)
*** can move up and down ontology
*** shape and syntax; best practice

* Discussion of images (linked to AO, PATO) – definitional, put in ontology; browsing, finding right AO term
** could call for images in particular sets of species

* Are ontologies useful for phylogenetics?  ATOL data and relationships are a challenge (Paul)
** Can a matrix be reconstructed and can data be related in an effective way?
** Do ontologies serve this community well?
** Limiting from community?
** Explore whether useful for phylogenetics?
** Capability of characters for phylogenetic studies?
* Viability of PhenoscapeII depends on morphologists using it!
** vast phylogenetic branches – does character annotation at gross level conceal or reveal phylogenetic information?
** Can we retrieve the characters that are discordant?
* What question motivates character matrix?

== Developmental time & misc discussion ==
* Development of mouse and Xenopus:
** Notochord in adult example
* Phenoscape II: create developmental time ontology for vertebrates.
* Compare heterochronies:
** relative ordering of entities and associated gene expression
** Anne’s example of heterochronic frogs…

** Notochord-hedgehog at particular times & wnts
* For a given evolutionary change, what are genes expressed in a time at a place?
** pick ~ 12 terms and make table and map for multiples species

* Phenoscape and vertebrate development ontology (?)
** would facilitate finding genes responsible
** without start and stop times, would have develops_from only
** enables placement of a phenotypic information into a developmental framework; develops_from
** what are the sets of characters that evolve at derived condition; see how phenotypic characters cluster at particular branch points; even do math, counting nodes; can do stats at branch points.
** creating diff definitions of homology; try to experimentally differentiate species
* Evolutionary time: use cases; compare sister groups
** Rates
** Dating clades – minimum age

* Database discussion – Todd/Jim

* OBD – Suzi – Need to work on ability to pull things back on basis of similarity; on basis of phenotype – what else is there that affects a bone?
* Suzi & co. would adopt single searches by gene or body parts

** Cartik: Support units and measures
** Jim: User see OBD structure – enter a term and visualize EQ annotations in relation to it;
** See Ensemble – Phenoscape Mammals; Phenoscape Amphibs; Phenoscape Fishes – Allow user to move between taxonomic stashes without mapping

** Sparkle: Chris: issue generic queries – return data in generic format

**
** Suzi: Allow people to add term if they are making query and not finding anything
*** could repurpose protein tree/ GO
*** relative ordering of entities and associated gene expression

== Wednesday morning, April 29, 2009 ==

* Expanding taxonomic coverage to Vertebrata
** Phenoscape has about 15,000 species of teleosts untouched (half that number is sampled in a typical study) and approx 200 matrices to target
** Amphibanat estimates 3,000 amphib species and approx 36 matrices
** Plan to maintain skeletal focus for anatomy development
* How best to keep nomenclature history?
** Nomenclatural history of terms in ontologies
** mechanism to keep track of in OBO-edit? No
** keep track of this information on the database side
** Current exchange format standards don't support this really beyond obsoletion
** ZFIN tracks within the database the complete nomenclatural history of gene names; (ZFIN records the reason, comments etc…in database comments)
** RDBOM tracks literature and author attribution for anatomy terms but not yet nomenclatural history
*** Amphibanat handles comments with fields:
**** Is_defined_by:
**** Is_discussed_by:
**** Literature citations are an ontology linked to other concepts
* Character quality profiles for data matrices
** Addresses the question of "Where in the skeleton are the changes occurring that drive the phylogeny"
** Distribution of characters across the skeletal anatomy, at different levels of the hierarchy
** Distribution of missing data across the anatomy, at different hierarchy levels
** How many taxa have how much missing data, distributed on which anatomical parts
* DRIVING QUESTIONS:
** What parts are of phenotype are variable a) in particular taxonomic groups; b) in particular author’s studies?
*** Where are the gaps in character variation?  In taxon sampling?
*** Why are there gaps in phenotype variation? Missing data, fossils
*** What is not changing – not in matrix –
*** Because extinct not in fossil record (no a??)
*** Or constrained (just no variation)
*** To get at redundancy, have to factor in taxonomic sampling and character sampling.
** Q: Who much is good data? How much is redundant?
*** What is redundancy? Identical EQs?  Action: curate to fine grain in order to match; develop tool to be able to see other EQ annotations
** Q: How does the order of development correspond to the order to evolution?
* Use case: Character redundancy
** Deriving a character profile across the anatomy could help visualize the redundancy between annotations
* Use case: Mapping the evolutionary characters that lead (and distinguish) to a model organism. Subsequently, see whether these evolutionary changes and the order in which they appear to the ontogeny of the organism.
** Will need to deal with character gaps and with character redundancy for this.

'''Specific goals:'''
# Expand taxonomic coverage of Phenoscape to Vertebrata
#* Mouse is done but needs to be rearranged (MP decomposition)
#* Amniotes need to be done from the ground up
== ==

*Evolutionary time:
** TimeTree www.timetree.com; pairwise comparisons to get ages
** Questions that can be asked regarding geologic time:
*** How far back in time do you need to go to find a particular change in phenotype?
*** Does this type of character change occur during a particular time period?
**** Requires trees
* Informatics: what do you want to see?
** Cartik: measurements displayed in web interface (it’s supported in Phenex and OBD currently)
** Jim: user upload; group annotations and click through neigborhoods…see Hilmar notes

* Tree visualization
** Nodes don’t have ancestral state reconstruction, they are the union of phenotypes in the database; displays all the phenotypes that are recorded in a clade, not mapping of characters.
** PhyloWidget developed in 2007 summer of code
*** Annotate parts of the tree with images, phenotypes, etc.. to a tree topology
** Character optimization for Phenoscape II
*** Optimizing EQs involves deciding which EQ is alternative to another
*** Todd: Easier for user to download data and create matrix on their own

* Phenex stuff:
** Add skeletal parts in association with museum voucher for paleo data; for extant dry skeletal vs. cl/st. Could help discern WHY, e.g., cartilage is not variable in data matrix.

== Wednesday afternoon ==

* Problem of lossy transformation of legacy character data
** EQ annotation is often at a lesser granularity (or level of detail) than the original free text description
** This isn't due to any technological obstacles but rather due to the limited resources available for annotation.
** Annotation effort is best focused to a granularity level where it suffices to solve a use-case of interest.
** Annotating at very granular levels is entirely possible but can take a lot of time because many of the ontology terms needed are likely not to be present yet in the ontology.
** How does this impact phylogeny and data matrix reconciliation, or phylogenetic reconstruction on the basis of the EQ annotations?

* Use-case for development
** Heterochrony would be interesting if one can pull it out of the database
** Ordering of developmental landmarks uses develops_from; Developmental ordering relationships currently used are confined to develops_from and transforms-into.
*** This is missing yet for mouse.
*** Wouldn't really allow inferring heterochrony.
*** Would allow though to place and compare the placement of phenotypes into a developmental chain of transformations.
** Use case to compare sequence of ossification in ontogeny of an individual vs. among species variation in degree of ossification of a structure; idea is to visualize where these structures are on the developmental sequence of a MOD
** Homology and develops_from:
** Juvenile wing primordiium homologous to adult limb?
** John: should add the phrase to any homology statement: “two things are homologous as _______”


*Evolutionary time:
** TimeTree www.timetree.com; pairwise comparisons to get ages
** Questions that can be asked regarding geologic time:
*** How far back in time do you need to go to find a particular change in phenotype?
*** Does this type of character change occur during a particular time period?
**** Requires trees
* Informatics: what do you want to see?
** Cartik: measurements displayed in web interface (it’s supported in Phenex and OBD currently)
** Jim: user upload; group annotations and click through neigborhoods…see Hilmar notes

* Demonstration of Phenoscape KB
** Some of the features we are developing (the 3 principle queries) would be very useful to MOD users
* Informatics goals for Phenoscape 2:
** Supporting units for measurements
** Allowing others to compare their phenotype data to the knowledge base
** Generic ontological queries, such as a SPARQL endpoint
** Private data overlay
** Linked Data and semweb integration
** Tree visualization
** Triple store technology evaluation
** Species ID
** Phylogenetically informative distance metric based on EQ assertions
** NLP-based text processing, Mass curation

== Idea bin ==

# Intermine connection (multiple model organisms, AJAX-based widget for displaying protein family tree)
# Some phenotypes imply developmental abnormalities, differences, or variation.
#* For example, a "poorly ossified cranium" in an adult amphibian implies that the developmental process was delayed or did not complete.
# How does logical inference of homology propagate over develops-from relationships.
#* E.g., if A and B are asserted homologous, and C develops from A and D develops from B, are then C and D inferred as homologous, and are C and B inferred as homologous.

[[Category:Events]]