---
title: Phenex release history
---

==Phenex 1.8==
Released 2013-03-05.
* [https://github.com/phenoscape/Phenex/compare/v1.7...v1.8 Source changes]
* New feature: [[Phenex#Consistency_Review_panel|Consistency review panel]]

==Phenex 1.7==
Released 2012-12-07.
* [https://github.com/phenoscape/Phenex/compare/v1.6.3...v1.7 Source changes]
* New feature: Annotation checker panel
* Increased max memory setting to 2 gigabytes.

==Phenex 1.6.3==
Released 2012-12-05.
* [https://github.com/phenoscape/Phenex/compare/v1.6.2...v1.6.3 Source changes]
* Bugfix: Added missing Phenex relations list to default ontology configuration.

==Phenex 1.6.2==
Released 2012-12-03.
* [https://github.com/phenoscape/Phenex/compare/v1.6.1...v1.6.2 Source changes]
* Fixed a problem with the version number in the release.

==Phenex 1.6.1==
Released 2012-12-03.
* [https://github.com/phenoscape/Phenex/compare/v1.6...v1.6.1 Source changes]
* Updated entities filter to allow any term with the UBERON prefix.
* Fixed editing issue with publication notes field.
* Fixed null pointer exception in tab-delimited export.

==Phenex 1.6==
Released 2012-10-09.
* [https://github.com/phenoscape/Phenex/compare/v1.5.1...v1.6 Source changes]
* New feature: full support for reading, writing, and editing [[Phenex#Entering_polymorphic_or_uncertain_state_values|polymorphic values within matrix cells]].
* Removed NEXUS import features. NEXUS files should instead be [[Phenex#Importing_data_from_a_NEXUS_file|converted to NeXML using Mesquite]].

==Phenex 1.5.1==
Released 2012-10-03.
* [https://github.com/phenoscape/Phenex/compare/v1.5...v1.5.1 Source changes]
* Fixed a problem with download of provisional terms from Bioportal.

[[Category:Informatics]]
[[Category:Phenex]]
[[Category:Software]]