---
title: Phenoscape 1 Curated Publications
---

#Albert, J. S. (2001). "Species Diversity and Phylogenetic systematics of American Knifefishes (Gymnotiformes, Teleostei)." Miscellaneous Publications, Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan no. 190: 140 pages.
#Armbruster, J. W. (2004). "Phylogenetic relationships of the suckermouth armoured catfishes (Loricariidae) with emphasis on the Hypostominae and the Ancistrinae." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 141: 1-80.
#Arratia, G. (1999). The monophyly of Teleostei and stem-group teleosts.  Consensus and disagreements Mesozoic Fishes 2- Systematics and Fossil Record. G. Arratia and H.-P. Schultze. Munchen, Verlag Dr. F. Pfeil: 265-334.
#Bockmann, F. A. (1998). Análise Filogenética da Família Heptapteridae (Teleostei, Ostariophysi, Siluriformes) e Redefenição de seus Gêneros São Paulo, Universidade de São Paulo.
#Bornbusch, A. H. (1995). "Phylogenetic relationships within the Eurasian catfish family Siluridae (Pisces: Siluriformes), with comments on generic validities and biogeography." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 115: 1-46.
#Britto, M. R. (2003). "Phylogeny of the subfamily Corydoradinae Hoedeman, 1952 (Siluriformes: Callichthyidae), with a definition of its genera." Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia 153: 119-154.
#Buckup, P. A. (1998). Relationships of the Characidiinae and phylogeny of characiform fishes (Teleostei: Ostariophysi). Phylogeny and Classification of Neotropical Fishes. L. R. Malabarba, R. E. Reis, R. P. Vari, Z. M. S. Lucena and C. A. S. Lucena. Porto Alegre, Brazil, EDIPUCRS: 123-144.
#Cavender, T. M. and M. M. Coburn (1992). Phylogenetic relationships of North American Cyprinidae. Systematics, Historical Ecology, and North American Freshwater Fishes. R. L. Mayden. Stanford, Stanford University Press: 293-327.
#Chanet, B. (2003). "Interrelationships of scophthalmid fishes (Pleuronectiformes: Scophthalmidae)." Cybium 27: 275-286.
#Chang, M. M. and J. G. Maisey (2003). "Redescription of ''Ellimma branneri'' and ''Diplomystus shengliensis'', and relationships of some basal Clupeomorphs." American Museum Novitates 3404: 1-35.
#Chapleau, F. (1993). "Pleuronectiforms relationships: A cladistic reassessment." Bulletin of Marine Science 52(1): 516-540.
#Chen, X.-P. (1994). Phylogenetic studies of the amblycipitid catfishes (Teleostei, Siluriformes) with species accounts. Durham, Duke University. PhD.
#Coburn, M. M. and T. M. Cavender (1992). Interrelationships of North American cyprinid fishes. Systematics, Historical Ecology, and North American Freshwater Fishes. R. L. Mayden. Stanford, California, Stanford University Press.
#de Pinna, M. C. C. (1993). Higher-level Phylogeny of Siluriformes (Teleostei: Ostariophysi), with a New Classification of the Order. New York, City University of New York. PhD.
#de Pinna, M. C. C. (1996). "A phylogenetic analysis of the Asian catfish families Sisoridae, Akysidae, and Amblycipitidae, with a hypothesis on the relationships of the neotropical Aspredinidae (Teleostei, Ostariophysi)." Fieldiana: Zoology (New Series) 84: i–iv + 1-83.
#de Pinna, M. C. C., C. J. J. Ferraris, et al. (2007). "A phylogenetic study of the neotropical catfish family Cetopsidae (Osteichthys, Ostariophysi, Siluriformes), with a new classification." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 150: 755-813.
#Di Dario, F. (1999). Filogenia de Pristigasteroidea (Teleostei, Clupeomorpha). Departamento de Zoologia São Paulo, Universidade de São Paulo. M.S.: 465.
#Fang, F. (2003). "Phylogenetic analysis of the Asian Cyprinid genus Danio (Teleostei, Cyprinidae)." Copeia 2003(4): 714-728.
#Fink, S. V. and W. L. Fink (1981). "Interrelationships of the Ostariophysan fishes (Teleostei)." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 72(4): 297-353.
#Friel, J. P. (1994). A Phylogenetic Study of the Neotropical Banjo Catfishes (Teleostei: Siluriformes: Aspredinidae). Durham, Duke University.
#Gardiner, B. G. (1984). "The relationships of the palaeoniscid fishes, a review based on new specimens of Mimia and Moythomasia from the Upper Devonian of Western Australia." Bull. Brit. Mus. Nat. Hist., Geol. 37: 173-427.
#Grande, T. and L. Grande, Eds. (2008). Reevaluation of the gonorynchiform genera ''Ramallichthys'', ''Judeichthys'' and ''Notogoneus'', with comments on the families Charitosomidae and Gonorynchidae. Mesozoic Fishes 4 – Homology and Phylogeny. München, Germany, Verlag Dr. Friedrich Pfeil.
#Grande, T. and F. J. Poyato-Ariza (1999). "Phylogenetic relationships of fossil and Recent gonorynchiform fishes (Teleostei: Ostariophysi)." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 125: 197-238.
#Grande, T., H. Laten, et al. (2004). "Phylogenetic relationships of extant esocid species (Teleostei:  Salmoniformes) based on morphological and molecular characters." Copeia(4): 743-757.
#Johnson, G. D. and C. Patterson (1993). "Percomorph phylogeny: a survey of acanthomorphs and a new proposal." Bulletin of Marine Science 52(1): 554-626.
#Kailola, P. J. (2004). " A phylogenetic exploration of the catfish family Ariidae (Otophysi; Siluriformes)." The Beagle, Records of the Museums and Art Galleries of the Northern Territory 20: 87-166.
#Lucena, C. A. S. and N. A. Menezes (1998). A phylogenetic analysis of ''Roestes'' Günther and '''Gilbertolus''' Eigenmann with a hypothesis on the relationships of the Cynodontidae and Acestrorhynchidae (Teleostei, Ostariophysi, Characiformes). Phylogeny and Classification of Neotropical Fishes. L. R. Malabarba, R. E. Reis, R. P. Vari, Z. M. S. Lucena and C. A. S. Lucena. Porto Alegre, Brazil, EDIPUCRS: 261-278.
#Lundberg, J. G. (1992). The phylogeny of ictalurid catfishes: A synthesis of recent work. Systematics, Historical Ecology, and North American Freshwater Fishes. R. L. Mayden. Stanford, Stanford University Press: 392-420.
#Malabarba, L. R. (1998). Monophyly of the Cheirodontinae, Characters and Major Clades (Ostariophysi: Characidae). Phylogeny and Classification of Neotropical Fishes. L. R. Malabarba, R. E. Reis, R. P. Vari, Z. M. S. Lucena and C. A. S. Lucena. Porto Alegre, Brazil, EDIPUCRS: 193-234.
#Mayden, R. L. (1989). "Phylogenetic studies of North American minnows, with emphasis on the genus ''Cyprinella'' (Teleostei: Cypriniformes)." University of Kansas Museum of Natural History Miscellaneous Publications 80: 1-189.
#Mo, T. (1991). Anatomy, Relationships and Systematics of the Bagridae (Teleostei: Siluroidei) with a Hypothesis of Siluroid Phylogeny. Koeltz, Koenigstein. Theses Zoologicae, 17.
#Mooi, R. D. and G. D. Johnson (1997). " Dismantling the Trachinoidei: evidence of a scorpaenoid relationship for the Champsodontidae." Ichthyological Research 44(2): 143-176.
#Otero, O. (2004). " Anatomy, systematics and phylogeny of both Recent and fossil latid fishes (Teleostei, Perciformes, Latidae)." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 141(1): 81-133.
#Poyato-Ariza, F. J. (1996). "A revision of the ostariophysan fish family Chanidae, with special reference to the Mesozoic forms." Palaeo Ichthyologica 6: 1-52.
#Royero, R. (1999). Studies on the systematics and phylogeny of the catfish family Auchenipteridae (Teleostei: Siluriformes). Bristol, University of Bristol.
#Sanger, T. J. and A. R. McCune (2002). "Comparative osteology of the ''Danio'' (Cyprinidae: Ostariophysi) axial skeleton with comments on Danio relationships based on molecules and morphology." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 135: 529-546.
#Santini, F. and J. Tyler (2002). "Phylogeny of the ocean sunfishes (Molidae, Tetraodontiformes), a highly derived group of teleost fishes." Italian Journal of Zoology 69(1): 37-43.
#Sawada, Y. (1982). "Phylogeny and zoogeography of superfamily Cobitoidea (Cyprinoidei, Cypriniformes)." Mem. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 28: 65-223.
#Schaefer, S. A. (1987). "Osteology of ''Hypostomus plecostomus'' (Linnaeus), with a phylogenetic analysis of the loricariid subfamilies (Pisces: Siluriformes)." Contributions in Science, Los Angeles County Museum(394): 1-31.
#Schaefer, S. A. (1991). " Phylogenetic analysis of the loricariid subfamily Hypoptopomatinae (Pisces: Siluroidei: Loricariidae), with comments on generic diagnoses and geographic distribution." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 102: 1-41.
#Shibatta, O. A. (1998). Sistemática e Evolução da Família Pseudopimelodidae (Ostariophysi, Siluriformes), com a Revisão Taxonômica de Gênero Pseudopimelodus. São Paulo, Universidade Federal São Carlos. PhD.
#Sidlauskas, B. L. and R. P. Vari (2008). "Phylogenetic relationships within the South American fish family Anostomidae (Teleostei, Ostariophysi, Characiformes)." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 154: 70-210.
#Siebert, D. H. (1987). Interrelationships among families of the order Cypriniformes (Teleostei), City University of New York, New York, New York.
#Smith, G. R. (1992). Phylogeny and biogeography of the Catostomidae, freshwater fishes of North America and Asia. Systematics, Historical Ecology, and North American Freshwater Fishes. R. L. Mayden. Stanford, CA, Stanford University Press: 778-826.
#Soares-Porto, L. M. (1998). Monophyly and interrelationships of the Centromochlinae (Siluriformes: Auchenipteridae). Phylogeny and Classification of Neotropical Fishes. L. R. Malabarba, R. E. Reis, R. P. Vari, Z. M. S. Lucena and C. A. S. Lucena. Porto Alegre, Edipucrs: 331-350.
#Toledo-Piza, M. (2000). "The Neotropical fish subfamily Cynodontinae (Teleostei: Ostariophysi: Characiformes): A phylogenetic study and revision of Cynodon and Rhaphiodon." American Museum Novitates 3286: 1-88.
#Toledo-Piza, M. (2007). "Phylogenetic relationships among ''Acestrorhynchus'' species (Ostariophysi: Characiformes: Acestrorhynchidae)." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 151: 691-757.
#Vari, R. P. (1995). "The Neotropical Fish Family Ctenoluciidae (Teleostei: Ostariophysi: Characiformes): Supra and Intrafamilial Phylogenetic Relationships, with a Revisionary Study." Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology 564: 1-97.
#Vari, R. P. and A. S. Harold (2001). "Phylogenetic study of the neotropical fish genera ''Creagrutus'' Günther and ''Piabina'' Reinhardt (Teleostei: Ostariophysi: Characiformes), with a revision of the cis-Andean species." Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology 613: v+1-239.
#Vigliotta, T. R. (2008). "A phylogenetic study of the African catfish family Mochokidae (Osteichthyes, Ostariophysi, Siluriformes), with a key to its genera." Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia 157: 73-136.
#Weitzman, S. H. and N. A. Menezes (1998). Relationships of the tribes and genera of the Glandulocaudiinae (Ostariophysi: Characiformes: Characidae), with a description of a new genus. Phylogeny and Classification of Neotropical Fishes. L. R. Malabarba, R. E. Reis, R. P. Vari, Z. M. S. Lucena and C. A. S. Lucena. Porto Alegre, EDIPUCRS: 171-192.
#Wiley, E. O., G. D. Johnson, et al. (2000). "The interrelationships of acanthomorph fishes: a total evidence approach using molecular and morphological data." Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 28: 319-350.
#Zanata, A. M. and R. P. Vari (2005). "The family Alestidae (Ostariophysi, Characiformes): a phylogenetic analysis of a trans-Atlantic clade." Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 145(1): 1-144.
# Zaragueta Bagils, R. (2004). Basal clupeomorphs and ellimmichthyiform phylogeny. Mesozoic Fishes 3 - Systematics, Paleoenvironments and Biodiversity G. Arratia and A. Tintori. Munich, Verlag Dr. F. Pfeil: 391-404.

[[Category:Curation]]
[[Category:Phenoscape I]]