---
title: Phenotype Ontology Coordination Workshop
permalink: wiki/Phenotype_Ontology_Coordination_Workshop
layout: wiki
tags:
 - Community
 - Events
 - Ontology
---

<center>

<big>**Phenotype Ontology Coordination Workshop: April 27-28,
2009**</big>  
  
A workshop hosted by the National Evolutionary Synthesis Center
(NESCent)

</center>

## Location and Date

**Venue:** National Evolutionary Synthesis Center (NESCent)
(<span class="plainlinks">[directions](http://www.nescent.org/about/directions.php)</span>,
also see <span class="plainlinks">[information for
visitors](http://www.nescent.org/about/information.php)</span>)

**Date:** April 27-28, 2009

**Organizers:** Paula Mabee, Monte Westerfield, Todd Vision

## Introduction

The goal of this workshop is to discuss plans for an [RCN (Research
Coordination
Network)](http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=11691) or
[INTEROP (Community-based Data Interoperability
Networks)](http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf07565/nsf07565.htm)
application to NSF that we would submit in July or August 2009. The
grant would provide funds for 3-5 years of meetings and workshops (and
in the case of the INTEROP program, implementation to a limited extent)
to identify problems and develop methods and plans to describe
phenotypes in a much broader range of species.

Specific goals are to be determined by the workshop participants. An
initial list includes establishing and maintaining communication among
evolutionary biologists and model organism communities developing
ontologies, coordinating efforts among the broader ontology community so
that these ontologies are interoperable, and methods to align and reason
across multi-species ontologies for phenotype and taxonomy. The workshop
includes interested members from both the model organism and
evolutionary biology communities.

## Agenda

### Monday, Apr. 27, 2009

*Taking stock: Where do we stand? What resources and needs do we have in
common? Identify broader community needs for a \[Comparative
Evolutionary\] Phenotype Consortium that are not currently served by
individual grants.*

**Morning:** What new ontologies are required? How do existing common
ontologies need to be extended?

- 8:00 SHUTTLE FROM HOTEL
- 8:15 Coffee & pastries
- 8:30-9:30 Welcomes from NESCent (Todd Vision) and participant
  introductions (2-3 minute lightening talks)
- 9:30-9:45 Paula Mabee: Introduction
- 9:45 Breakout groups (4 groups, all 4 questions each):
- Breakout questions: Tools (software), standards, and ontologies
- 1\. What are the key gaps in tools to develop your work?
- 2\. What are key obstacles to data exchange and data integration?
- 3\. What do you perceive as the key ontologies that are lacking?
- 4\. What are the gaps in expertise in understanding, developing and
  applying ontologies in the community?
- 10:45 Coffee
- 11:00-11:45 Second breakout (2 groups, 2 questions each)
- 11:45-12:15 Reports from break-out groups
- 12:15 LUNCH

**Afternoon:** Annotation and Interoperability

- 1:30 – 2:00: Case study and analysis; interoperability (Monte
  Westerfield)
- 2:00 – 2:45: Breakout groups:
  1.  Annotation group: What phenotype curation/annotation needs are
      there that are not adequately met? E.g. software, standards,
      best-practices, education, syntax, etc.
  2.  Interoperability group 1 (MOD-EvoD): Develop a plan for
      interoperability between MODs and EvoDs through ontology
      synchronization and alignment
  3.  Interoperability group 2 (EvoD-EvoD): Develop a plan for
      interoperability among EvoDs, and with other community resources
      through alignment, considering the types of driving research
      questions (similarity searches on function, homology, etc.). What
      are the most important databases and tools to integrate into this
      effort?
- 2:45-3:15 Group reports
- 3:15 Coffee break
- 3:30-4:15: Annotation, Interoperability I and II break out groups
  (different participants)
- 4:15-5:00: Reports from break outs and discussion
- 5:00: Van back to hotel
- 5:30-6:30: Drinks at hotel
- 6:30 Van from hotel to dinner (whole group)

### Tuesday, Apr. 27, 2009

**Morning:** Databases and Trees;

- 8:00 SHUTTLE FROM HOTEL
- 8:15 Coffee & pastries
- 8:45 – 9:30 Break out groups
  1.  Database group: Do we have database needs for annotations from
      this grant activity? Common database, i.e. a vision to create a
      community resource for comparative phenotype data?
  2.  Tree group: How does phylogenetic tree inference vs. mapping
      intersect with the needs of a phenotype consortium?
  3.  Outreach group: What are the priority outreach elements from this
      grant? How to make these ontologies and annotations (?) available
      to the broader community? Training (e.g. summer course at
      Biosynthesis Center, CSH, NESCent, NCESC? Other?); Develop online
      tutorials? Infrastructure for basics: mailing list, meeting
      announcements, etc.
- 9:30-10:00 Reports from break out groups
- 10:00-10:15 Coffee
- 10:15-10:30: Decisions on who will write up break out group ideas
- 10:30-11:30: Writing
- 11:30-12:00: Action items, plans, preliminary coordination of grant
  proposal
- 12:00 Lunch, participants leave

## Logistics

- For long-distance participants, the hotel is the [Millennium
  Hotel](http://www.millenniumhotels.com/MCIL.nsf/LU_HOTELDOC/113$$HotelDescription?OpenDocument)
  (2800 Campus Walk Ave, Durham, NC 27705; tel. (919) 383-8575)
- For dining & entertainment, NESCent is right across from [Ninth
  Street](http://www.ninthst.com/)
- For the venue, NESCent is in the historic [Erwin
  Mills](http://www.owdna.org/mill.htm) building
  (<span class="plainlinks">[directions](http://www.nescent.org/about/directions.php)</span>)

## Reading

- Within the Phenoscape project, we have been tagging interesting
  references about phenotype and taxonomy ontologies by using the tag
  "<span class="plainlinks">[phenoscape](http://www.connotea.org/tag/phenoscape)</span>"
  on Connotea. Everyone is welcome to suggest references by using this
  tag.

## Final report

- The <a href="Media:Phenotype_mtgreport.pdf" class="wikilink"
  title="final report">final report</a> from this workshop summarizes
  the participants views as the specific research questions to be
  answered and thus goals to be achieved through a community‐based
  grant. Break-out groups provided perspective on the questions below.

1\. What are the key gaps in tools to develop your work? 2. What are key
obstacles to data exchange and data integration? 3. What do you perceive
as the key ontologies that are lacking? 4. What are the gaps in
expertise in understanding, developing and applying ontologies in the
community?

## Participants

Members of Phenoscape are in **bold font**.

| Name | Institution                    |
|------|--------------------------------|
