---
title: Phenotype Ontology Coordination Workshop
---

<center><big>'''Phenotype Ontology Coordination Workshop'''</big><br/><br/>A workshop hosted by the National Evolutionary Synthesis Center (NESCent)</center>

__NOTOC__
<div style="float: right;">__TOC__</div>
== Location and Date ==

'''Venue:''' National Evolutionary Synthesis Center (NESCent) (<span class="plainlinks">[http://www.nescent.org/about/directions.php directions]</span>, also see <span class="plainlinks">[http://www.nescent.org/about/information.php information for visitors]</span>)

'''Date:''' Arpil 27-28, 2009

'''Organizers:''' Paula Mabee, Monte Westerfield, Todd Vision

== Introduction ==

The goal of this workshop is to discuss plans for an [http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=11691 RCN (Research Coordination Network)] or [http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf07565/nsf07565.htm INTEROP (Community-based Data Interoperability Networks)] application to NSF that we would submit in July or August 2009.  The grant would provide funds for 3-5 years of meetings and workshops (and in the case of the INTEROP program, implementation to a limited extent) to identify problems and develop methods and plans to describe phenotypes in a much broader range of species.

Specific goals are to be determined by the workshop participants. An initial list includes establishing and maintaining communication among evolutionary biologists and model organism communities developing ontologies, coordinating efforts among the broader ontology community so that these ontologies are interoperable, and methods to align and reason across multi-species ontologies for phenotype and taxonomy.  The workshop includes interested members from both the model organism and evolutionary biology communities.

== Agenda ==

''Note that this agenda is still in draft stage and may change before the meeting.''

=== Monday, Apr. 27, 2009 ===

''Taking stock: Where do we stand? What resources and needs do we have in common? Identify broader community needs for a [Comparative Evolutionary] Phenotype Consortium that are not currently served by individual grants.''

'''Morning:''' What new ontologies are required? How do existing common ontologies need to be extended?

* 8:00 SHUTTLE FROM HOTEL
* 8:15 Coffee & pastries
* 8:30 Welcomes from NESCent (Todd Vision) and participant introductions (2-3 minute lightening talks)
* 9:00 Paula Mabee: Introduction: current phenotype ontology communities (MOD, Evo), where we stand in terms of ontologies and related databases, possibilities for where we go in the next 3-5 years, description of Interop vs. RCN, workshop goals
* 9:30-10:15 Breakout groups and topics (need note-taker in each group):
*# Taxonomy group: Do we need taxonomy ontologies for individual groups or a single reference ontology?  How to ensure interoperability with NCBI taxonomy ontology and associated molecular data (given EvoD need to represent extinct species) – with EoL/GBIF/etc and associated geospatial data?  What specific steps should be taken to support the development of taxonomy ontologies and these integrative activities within the context of a phenotype consortium grant?
*# Morphology group: How do existing common ontologies (AOs, PATO, CARO, Spatial, institutional collections codes, evidence code) need to be extended? How should multispecies anatomy ontologies be developed in relation to MOD anatomy ontologies, and how should synchrony be maintained?
*# Ontologies with common time representation problem (developmental time, evolutionary time, paleontology, behavior): Is this a separate ‘core’?  Is it useful to generalize this problem and find common solutions?  Will it enhance interoperability?
* 10:15-10:45 Group reports
* 10:45 COFFEE
* 11:00-11:45 Taxonomy, Morphology, and Ontologies/time break out groups (different participants in each)
* 11:45-12:15 Reports from break-out groups
* 12:15 LUNCH

'''Afternoon:''' Annotation and Interoperability

* 1:30 – 2:00: Case study and analysis; interoperability (Monte Westerfield)
* 2:00 – 2:45: Breakout groups:
*# Annotation group: What phenotype curation/annotation needs are there that are not adequately met?  E.g. software, standards, best-practices, education, syntax, etc.
*# Interoperability group 1 (MOD-EvoD): Develop a plan for interoperability between MODs and EvoDs through ontology synchronization and alignment
*# Interoperability group 2 (MOD-EvoD): Develop a plan for interoperability among EvoDs, and with other community resources through alignment, considering the types of driving research questions (similarity searches on function, homology, etc.).  What are the most important databases and tools to integrate into this effort?
* 2:45-3:15 Group reports
* 3:15 Coffee break
* 3:30-4:15: Annotation, Interoperability I and II break out groups (different participants)
* 4:15-5:00: Reports from break outs and discussion
* 5:00: Van back to hotel
* 5:30-6:30: Drinks at hotel
* 6:30 Van from hotel to dinner (whole group)

=== Tuesday, Apr. 27, 2009 ===

'''Morning:''' Databases and Trees;

* 8:00 SHUTTLE FROM HOTEL
* 8:15 Coffee & pastries
* 8:45 – 9:30 Break out groups
*# Database group: Do we have database needs for annotations from this grant activity?  Common database, i.e. a vision to create a community resource for comparative phenotype data?
*# Tree group: How does phylogenetic tree inference vs. mapping intersect with the needs of a phenotype consortium?
*# Outreach group: What are the priority outreach elements from this grant?  How to make these ontologies and annotations (?) available to the broader community? Training (e.g. summer course at Biosynthesis Center, CSH, NESCent, NCESC? Other?); Develop online tutorials? Infrastructure for basics: mailing list, meeting announcements, etc.
* 9:30-10:00 Reports from break out groups
* 10:00-10:15 Coffee
* 10:15-10:30: Decisions on who will write up break out group ideas
* 10:30-11:30: Writing
* 11:30-12:00: Action items, plans, preliminary coordination of grant proposal
* 12:00 Lunch, participants leave

== Logistics ==

* For long-distance participants, the hotel is the [http://www.millenniumhotels.com/MCIL.nsf/LU_HOTELDOC/113$$HotelDescription?OpenDocument Millennium Hotel] (2800 Campus Walk Ave, Durham, NC  27705; tel. (919) 383-8575)
* For dining & entertainment, NESCent is right across from [http://www.ninthst.com/ Ninth Street]
* For the venue, NESCent is in the historic [http://www.owdna.org/mill.htm Erwin Mills] building (<span class="plainlinks">[http://www.nescent.org/about/directions.php directions]</span>)

== Reading ==

* We have started to use the tag "<span class="plainlinks">[http://www.connotea.org/tag/phenoscape phenoscape]</span>" on Connotea. Everyone is welcome to suggest references by using this tag.
* Relevant manuscripts by members of the project team:
# Mabee PM, Ashburner M, Cronk Q, Gkoutos GV, Haendel M, Segerdell E, Mungall C, and Westerfield M. Phenotype ontologies: the bridge between genomics and evolution. Trends Ecol Evol 2007 Jul; 22(7) 345-50. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2007.03.013 doi:10.1016/j.tree.2007.03.013]
# Mabee PM, Arratia G, Coburn M, Haendel M, Hilton EJ, Lundberg JG, Mayden RL, Rios N, and Westerfield M. Connecting evolutionary morphology to genomics using ontologies: a case study from Cypriniformes including zebrafish. J Exp Zoolog B Mol Dev Evol 2007 Jun 28. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jez.b.21181 doi:10.1002/jez.b.21181]
# Haendel, M.A., Neuhaus, F., Osumi-Sutherland, D.S., Mabee, P.M., Mejino J.L.V., Mungall, C.J., and Smith, B. (2008) [[Media:Caroreprint.pdf|CARO - The Common Anatomy Reference Ontology]]. ''In:'' Albert Burger, Duncan Davidson and Richard Baldock (Editors): ''Anatomy Ontologies for Bioinformatics: Principles and Practice''. ISBN 978-1-84628-884-5.

== Participants ==

Members of the project team are in '''bold font'''.

{| border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="0"
|-
! Name !! Institution
{{EventParticipant|Blake|Judy|Judith.Blake@jax.org|The Jackson Lab|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Coddington|Jonathan|CODDINGTON@si.edu|Department of Entomology, Smithsonian Institution|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Cowell|Lindsey|lgcowell@duke.edu|Duke University Medical Center|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Deans|Andy|andy_deans@ncsu.edu|NESCent|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Dumont|Betsy|bdumont@bio.umass.edu|Department of Biology, Univerity of Massachusetts, Amherst|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Huala|Eva|huala@acoma.stanford.edu|The Arabidopsis Information Resource|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Lapp|Hilmar|hlapp%40nescent%2eorg|NESCent|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Lewis|Suzi|suzi@berkeleybop.org|Berkeley Bioinformatics and Ontology Project |'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Maglia|Anne|magliaa@mst.edu|Missouri University of Science and Technology|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Mabee|Paula|pmabee%40usd%2eedu|University of South Dakota|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Midford|Peter|petermidford%40yahoo%2ecom|Dept. of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Kansas|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Parr|Cyndy|csparr@gmail.com |Smithsonian Institution and Encyclopedia of Life|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Riccardi|Grey|riccardi@ci.fsu.edu|College of Information, Florida State University|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Sereno|Paul|dinosaur@uchicago.edu|University of Chicago|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Stoltzfus|Arlin|Stoltzfus|Center for Advanced Research in Biotechnology|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Vision|Todd|tjv%40bio%2eunc%2eedu|NESCent, and Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Vize|Peter|pvize@ucalgary.ca|Department of Biology, University of Calgary|'''}}
{{EventParticipant|Westerfield|Monte|monte%40uoneuro%2euoregon%2eedu|Zebrafish Information Network (ZFIN) and Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon|'''}}
|}

[[Category:Community]]
[[Category:Events]]
[[Category:Ontology]]