---
title: Roadmap for first iteration
---

This is a development roadmap for the first production iteration of the Phenoscape database and web interface, for introduction at the [http://www.sicb.org/meetings/2009/index.php3 SICB 2009 meeting].
==Nov. 10-14==
===Jim===
* '''[Complete]''' Document interface design requirements on wiki
** See [[Web_UI_first_iteration|overview]] and [[Web_UI_mockups|mockup drawings]].
** These will continue to be updated.
* '''[Ongoing]''' Investigate and begin documenting additional data service needs required by interface
* '''[Complete]''' Start Rails web interface project; commit to SVN.
* '''[Complete]''' Write EQ count script, as per Paula's request, using Ruby; provide results to Phenoscape mailing list.

===Cartik===
* '''[Complete]''' Set up Eclipse project for Restlet based web service application on personal machine, commit to OBD-WS SVN.
** Cartik and Jim worked together on this and discussed the basics of Restlet applications.
** Can be found in SVN at https://obo.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/obo/OBD-WS/trunk
* '''[Complete]''' Begin implementing dummy term info and autocomplete services.

==Nov. 17-21==
===Jim===
* '''[Ongoing]''' Document data retrieval web service specifications
** Anatomy '''[Done]'''
** Taxon '''[Postponed]'''
** Genes '''[Done]'''
* '''[Complete]''' Implement Rails app skeleton and code front page
* '''[Complete]''' Implement reusable JavaScript term info panel and embed in front page search interface.
* '''[Postponed to after SICB]''' Address NEXUS/Phenote file merging issues with Paula. Provide problematic files as NeXML to Paula and Wasila.

===Cartik===
* '''[Complete]''' Deploy OBD-WS application; continue deploying in-progress builds.
** Package as WAR, deploy on Eryops.
** Include dummy autocomplete and term info services.
* '''[Complete]''' Begin implementing live Term Info service within OBD-WS application. 
* '''[Complete]''' Begin implementing live Autocomplete service within OBD-WS application.

==Nov. 24-28==
===Jim===
* '''[Complete]''' mostly on vacation
===Cartik===
* '''[Complete]''' Complete Term Info service
* '''[Complete]''' Complete Autocomplete service.
** ''NOTES (December 9, 2008)'': Term info search and autocomplete services have been tested on Phenoscape database on Eryops.
** Results for autocomplete are returned in JSON format and have been verified by Jim
* '''[Abandoned]''' Provide dummy Anatomy, Taxon, and Gene data service(s).

==Dec. 1-5==
===Jim===
* '''[Done]''' Implement anatomy UI.
* '''[Complete]''' Begin using autocomplete and term info services in all so-far developed user interfaces.

===Cartik===
* '''[Complete 2008-11-20]''' Write code to parse ZFIN phenotype data and load into OBD
** See http://zfin.org/zf_info/downloads.html#phenotype
** Data: http://zfin.org/data_transfer/Downloads/pheno_obo.txt
** should use "exhibits" relation
** NOTES (Date: Nov 20, 2008):
*# ZFIN phenotype curations have been loaded into OBD database on Cartik's laptop along with 71 NeXML files from Phenoscape project
*# ZFIN curations use PHENOSCAPE:exhibits and PHENOSCAPE:hasAllele relations
*# Database size is 1.6 GB after running the OBD reasoner
*# Database upload to Darwin complete (Nov 21, 2008)
*# Loaded ZFIN data has been tested against OBD query engine and Term search engine. The latter is to be part of prototype to be demo'ed at SICB, Boston
* '''[Completed on 2008-12-10]''' Enhance OBD data loader pipeline to perform pre-processing of ZFA ontology, replacing xrefs with is_a links to TAO
** These xrefs seem to still be in TAO - may have to fix that or work around
** NOTES (Date: Dec 10, 2008)
*# Is a links corresponding to DbXref links between ZFA and TAO terms have been added to Phenoscape database
*# Is a links are added correctly irrespective of direction of DbXref link between ZFA and TAO terms
*# New Phenoscape database will be loaded into Darwin tomorrow via PGSQL dump

==Dec. 8-12==
===Jim===
* '''[Done]''' Complete anatomy user interface.
* '''[Ongoing]''' Begin implementing taxon user interface - changed to Gene interface

===Cartik===
* '''[Complete]''' Complete ZFIN data loading tasks.
* '''[First version deployed 12-12-2008]'''Implement data service(s) related to Anatomy (requirements documented Nov. 17-21).
** ''NOTES''
**# Next version deployed on Dec 14, 2008
**# Tested on Eryops by Cartik on Dec 14
**# To be verified by Jim

==Dec. 15-19==
===Jim===
* Complete taxon user interface.
* Implement and complete gene user interface.
===Cartik===
* Complete implementing Anatomy data services.
* Begin implementing Taxon data services.

==Dec. 22 - Jan. 2 (2 weeks)==
===Jim===
* Mostly on vacation.
===Cartik===
* Complete Taxon data services.
* Completely implement Gene data services.

==Outcome==
===Query UI===
*Anatomy
*Taxon
*Gene
===Data Content===
* Ontologies
* Anatomy ontologies linkage
* Phenoscape annotations (NeXML)
* ZFIN annotations (tab-delimited)

[[Category:Informatics]]