---
title: Semantics of phenotype annotations
---

In Phenoscape data annotation, we typically model a phenotype as a class expression describing a set of organisms, for example <nowiki>'</nowiki>''has_part'' some ('''caudal_fin''' and ''bearer_of'' some '''bifurcated''')<nowiki>'</nowiki>. How precisely this phenotype class is related to a taxon has important consequences for the resulting inferences and thus queries for phenotypes across the taxonomy. This is most important when making annotations to higher-level taxa. How should these annotations propagate to sub-taxa?

This page assumes that taxa are represented as OWL individuals, and the taxonomy is a tree of ''subclade_of''/''contains_clade'' relationships. For example:

'''''Ictalurus_punctatus''''' ''subclade_of''  '''''Ictalurus''''' ''subclade_of'' '''''Ictaluridae''''' ''subclade_of'' '''''Siluriformes'''''

These are transitive, so that Ictalurus is a ''subclade_of'' Siluriformes. Individual organisms are related to taxa via ''member_of''/''has_member''. A ''member_of'' a taxon X which is a ''subclade_of'' taxon Y is also a ''member_of'' taxon Y.

==Types of phenotype annotations==
Formatting key: '''''OWL individual''''', '''OWL class''', ''OWL property''

===Class generalization===
(''member_of'' value '''''Siluriformes''''') SubClassOf (''has_part'' some ('''caudal_fin''' and ''bearer_of'' some '''bifurcated'''))

Very strong statement - says that all Siluriformes have a bifurcated caudal fin, no exceptions. This allows no observation of polymorphism or evolutionary reversal. But it does allow you to make one statement and then return any catfish species in a query for species with members having bifurcated caudal fins. This is generally the logic of annotations in the existing Phenoscape Knowledgebase.

===Observation annotation===
'''''Siluriformes''''' Type (''has_member'' some (''has_part'' some ('''caudal_fin''' and ''bearer_of'' some '''bifurcated''')))

This type of annotation simply says that some member of the given taxon has been observed with the phenotype. This works very well with polymorphic conditions and has no problem with evolutionary reversals. This form is pretty weak as an annotation to a broad taxon like Siluriformes (an order), but would be the most appropriate choice for species-level data.

===Ancestral state annotation===
'''''Siluriformes''''' Type (''has_progenitor'' some (''has_part'' some ('''caudal_fin''' and ''bearer_of'' some '''bifurcated''')))