---
title: Software roadmap
---

==Phenotype annotation editor==
===Enhance Phenote with necessary features to be productively and efficiently used by curators -- March 2008 (first Data Jamboree)===
* '''[complete]''' Initial Phenote configuration for PhenoScape data model.
* '''[complete]''' Specimen List window allowing curators to repeatedly choose one or more taxa for EQ annotation.
* '''[complete]''' Phylogeny view for selecting taxa to annotate.
* '''[complete]''' Search field to filter table rows.
* '''[complete]''' Ontology mode in search field for more advanced table filtering.
* '''[complete]''' Configuration for editing homology annotations.
* '''[complete]''' Transition PhenoScape components to Phenote 2 docking windows interface.
* '''[complete]''' Use standard menus and keyboard shortcuts for Open, Save, Quit, Cut, Copy, Paste, etc.
* '''[complete]''' Improved document saving functionality. User should be able to quickly save a document to the same file it was opened from.
* '''[complete]''' Rework Specimen List as Taxon List: each taxon has multiple specimens which can be picked from during annotation as supporting evidence.
* '''[complete]''' Choose museum code from pick list when entering specimen IDs.
* '''[complete]''' Make DAG view work browsing entire ontology, with drag-and-drop to fields.
* '''[complete]''' Allow user to edit field values directly in the table (especially for Specimen list).
* '''[complete]''' Allow user to create multiple, temporary annotation template lists while editing.  ''Not savable with current file format, however''
* '''[complete]''' Include preset docking interface configuration for Phenoscape

===Phenex editor (Phenote with custom character-oriented interface) 1.0-beta1 -- July 2008===
* '''[complete]''' Browse and edit characters and character states, edit EQ phenotypes per character state.
* '''[complete]''' Browse and edit taxa, edit specimens per taxon.
* '''[complete]''' New post-composition editing interface.
* '''[complete]''' Load from and save to NeXML file format.

===Phenex 1.0-beta3 -- August 2008===
* Character matrix panel for viewing and editing
* Open NEXUS files
* Import data from tab-delimited taxon and character files

===Phenex 1.0===
* Interface for user option for whether to update ontologies.
* User-customizable ontology preferences.
* Undo/redo support.

===Unscheduled features===
* Annotation using temporary terms, when an appropriate term is not available in an ontology. Ability to update these terms to official term once it is available.
* Create lookup-enabled Publication field (enter DOI or PMID).
* Character matrix view of annotations: Taxon by Entity+Attribute.

===Phenote integration with Phenoscape web application and database===
* Determine whether to integrate standalone Phenote application with web database, or migrate components into web application.

==Ontology editor==
===Curators begin by using OBO-Edit to view and edit project ontologies -- August 2007===
* '''[complete]''' Curators are using OBO-Edit successfully.

==A database and web application to store and query the taxonomies, ontologies, and phenotype data==

[[Category:Informatics]]