---
title: Synchronization Tool
---

The Synchronization Tool is a plug-in for [http://oboedit.org/ OBO-Edit] which aids in keeping the Teleost Anatomy Ontology and the Zebrafish Anatomy Ontology consistent with each other.
==System Requirements==
The Synchronization Tool runs as a plug-in within OBO-Edit 2.  The plug-in will not work with earlier versions of OBO-Edit.  Download OBO-Edit for your system from its [http://oboedit.org/?page=download website].

==Download & Installation==
The latest version of the Synchronization Tool plug-in can be obtained from the [http://sourceforge.net/projects/phenoscape/ Phenoscape Sourceforge project site].  The plug-in is packaged as a single "jar" file which works on all systems running OBO-Edit 2.
* [http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=224046&package_id=306516 Synchronization Tool downloads]
===Installation===
If you have not yet installed OBO-Edit, do so.  Move the downloaded Synchronization Tool jar file into the "extensions" folder within your OBO-Edit folder, then relaunch OBO-Edit.  You should now see "Synchronization Tool" within the "Tools" menu.
===Obtaining Synchronization Tool source code (for developers)===
To make contributions to the project or test the latest in-development code, you should check out a working copy from the Subversion repository:
* https://phenoscape.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/phenoscape/trunk/src/SynchronizationTool (use that URL with an SVN client, not a web browser)
The Synchronization Tool source includes both an Eclipse project (used for most active development) and an Ant build file (used for making releases). You can browse Synchronization Tool SVN revisions on the web at http://phenoscape.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/phenoscape/trunk/src/SynchronizationTool/.

==Reporting Bugs and Feature Requests==
Report any bugs and make feature requests using the [http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?group_id=224046&atid=1126441 Synchronization Tool issue tracker]. You will need to log in with a Sourceforge account to submit an issue (just create an account if you don't already have one). Be sure to choose a group for your new issue, either Bug Report or Feature Request.

==Usage==
===Tabs===
====Missing Dbxrefs====
====Conflicting Data====
====Missing Terms====
====Structural Differences====

[[Category:Informatics]]
[[Category:Ontology]]
[[Category:Curation]]