---
title: Teleost Taxonomy Ontology
---

==Summary==
This is an ontology of taxonomic terms (names of taxonomic groups) used in the systematics of fish, including non-teleost groups such as Chondrichtyes (sharks and rays), Sarcopterygia (lungfish and coelacanths), lampreys, and hagfish.  It contains (as of August 2010) over 38,500 names, and over 44,000 taxonomic synonyms.  A majority of the taxonomic names and synonyms were made available from the [http://research.calacademy.org/redirect?url=http://researcharchive.calacademy.org/research/ichthyology/catalog/fishcatmain.asp Catalog of Fishes].  In July 2010 we added nearly 15,000 common names provided by [http://www.fishbase.org Fishbase]Additional names and synonyms are added as a result of our curation activities.

Details of changes are recorded in the [[TTO_Changes]] page, (though this is not frequently updated), and summarized in the cvs commit comments.

The current release may be found [http://obo.cvs.sourceforge.net/viewvc/obo/obo/ontology/taxonomy/teleost_taxonomy.obo here].

==License==
<span class="plainlinks">[http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/ http://i.creativecommons.org/l/zero/1.0/80x15.png]</span>


To the extent possible under law, Peter E. Midford has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to the '''Teleost Taxonomy Ontology''' (TTO). This work is published from  the United States.

==Organization==



                               Ictaluridae   -------------------->  TaxRank:Family
                                    ^               has_rank
                                    |
                               is_a |
                                    |
                                ''Ictalurus''    -------------------->  TaxRank:Genus
                                    ^             has_rank
                                    |
                               is_a |
                                    |
 Channel catfish <--------+''Ictalurus punctatus'' ---------------->  TaxRank:Species
                          |                       has_rank
                          |
 ''Silurus argentinus''<------+


===List of term and database identifier prefixes===
* '''TTO:''' Term defined in the TTO
* '''NCBITaxon:''' ID from NCBI taxonomy database
* '''CASSPC:''' ID from the Catalog of Fishes species table (CAS = California Academy of Sciences)
* '''CASGEN:''' ID from the Catalog of Fishes genus table
* '''TAXRANK:''' Term defined in the Taxonomic Rank Vocabulary
* '''urn:''' URN from external resource, generally an [http://lsids.sourceforge.net/ lsid] from [http://gni.globalnames.org/ GNI].

===List of Relations and Synonym Types===
{|border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="3"
!Name
!Relation or Synonym
!Notes
|-
|COMMONNAME || synonym type || synonymous common name
|-
|MISSPELLING || synonym type || synonym resulting from identifiable misspelling
|-
|TAXONNAMEUSAGE || synonym type || synonym that includes an (author year) citation
|-
|property_value: has_rank || metadata relation || links taxa to ranks
|-
|property_value: is_extinct || boolean metadata relation || indicates taxa only known from fossils
|-
|}

====Notes====
* The taxonomic rank specified by the has_rank relation is specified by its identifier.  The most common are TAXRANK:0000004 (family), TAXRANK:0000005 (genus), TAXRANK:0000006 (species).
* At present is_extinct does not include recently extinct taxa.

==Detailed Term Counts==
{|border="1" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="3"
!Item
!Count
|-
|Total Terms || 38590
|-
|Total Synonyms || 59557
|-
|Common Name Synonyms || 14754
|-
|Synonyms resulting from misspelling || 18
|-
|Extinct Taxa || 228
|-
|Cross references to names in NCBI taxonomy || 13318
|-
|Phyla || 1
|-
|Classes || 3
|-
|Orders || 68
|-
|Families || 566
|-
|Genera || 5263
|-
|Species || 32653
|-
|}

[[Category:Ontology]]
[[Category:Taxonomy]]