---
title: TTO Changes
---

=Notes to the Reader=

=== Abbreviations ===

CASGEN - California Academy of Sciences, Catalog of Fishes (CoF), Genera Database

CASSPC - California Academy of Sciencies, Catalog of Fishes (CoF), Species Database

CoF - William Eschmeyer's [http://research.calacademy.org/research/ichthyology/catalog/index.html Catalog of Fishes]

TTO - [http://phenoscape.org/wiki/Taxonomy_ontology Teleost Taxonomy Ontology]

=== Possible actions for each change ===

Note: Obsoleting a term means it is no longer available for use and does not appear in the main hierarchy of the TTO.  Phenoscape needs to retain the name and term id so that prior annotations to the term do not break.

* '''Family added''' A new TTO term is created, which should have a dbxref referring to the publication or some CoF derived identifier.
* '''Family obsoleted''' The TTO term and id are obsoleted. Genera are moved to a new family or a higher taxon.

* '''Genus added''' A new TTO term is created, which should have a dbxref referring to the publication or a (new) CASGEN identifier
* '''Genus obsoleted''' The TTO term and id are obsoleted.  Any species under this genus are changed to the new genus.
* '''Genus moved''' The existing genus has its is_a relation changed to point to the new family or higher taxon.

* '''Species added''' A new TTO term is created, which should have a dbxref referring to the publication or a (new) CASSPC identifier.
* '''Species changed to/added as synonym of''' The TTO term and id are retained; the name is changed to the new name, the old name is added as a synonym.  The is_a relation for the species is updated to the new genus. The synonym should have a dbxref refering to the publication.  This is the default when the containing genus changes.
* '''Species obsoleted/added as synonym of ''' The term is obsoleted, the old name is added as a synonym of the new name.  The CASSPC or other dbxref of the old term should be added to the synonym.  This is the default when species are merged.

=Changes resulting from publication Fink and Fink (1981)=

Citation is:
Fink, SV. and Fink, WL. 1981. Interrelations of the ostariophysan fishes (Teleostei)
''Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society'' 72:297-353.

* ''Abramites sp.'' added as species
* ''Albula sp.'' added as species
* ''Apareiodon sp.'' added as species
* ''Astroblepus sp.'' added as species
* ''Brycon sp.'' added as species
* ''Bunocephalus sp.'' added as species
* ''Carpiodes sp.'' added as species
* ''Catostomus sp.'' added as species
* ''Characidium sp.'' added as species
* ''Clarias sp.'' added as species
* ''Coregonus sp.'' added as species
* ''Creagrutus sp.'' added as species
* ''Ctenolucius sp.'' added as species
* ''Distichodus sp.'' added as species
* ''Eigenmannia sp.'' added as species
* ''Esox sp.'' added as species
* ''Gymnocorymbus sp.'' added as species
* ''Gyrinocheilus sp.'' added as species
* ''Hemiodus sp.'' added as species
* ''Homaloptera sp.'' added as species
* ''Ichthyborus sp.'' added as species
* ''Ictalurus sp.'' added as species
* ''Megalops sp.'' added as species
* ''Mesoborus sp.'' added as species
* ''Poecilocharax sp.'' added as species
* ''Salmo sp.'' added as species
* ''Sternopygus sp.'' added as species
* ''Vandellia sp.'' added as species


=Change from a curator request=
* ''Danio devario'' added as synonym of ''Devario devario''


=Changes resulting from publication Britz and Hoffman (2006)=

Citation is:
Britz, R. and Hoffmann M. 2006.  Ontogeny and homology of the claustra in otophysan Ostariophysi (Teleostei)
''Journal of Morphology'' 267:90-923.

* ''Ancistrus sp.'' added as species
* ''Clarias sp.'' added as species
* ''Puntius sp.'' added as species
* ''Devario'' cf. ''aequipinnatus'' added as species
* ''Hemiloricaria beni'' added as synonym of ''Rineloricaria beni''


=Changes resulting from publication Fang (2003)=
* ''Danio'' aff. ''dangila'' added as species
* ''Chela sp.'' added as species
* ''Esomus sp.'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Sidlauskas and Vari (2008)=
Citation is:
Sidlauskas, BL. and Vari RP. Phylogenetic relationships within the South American
fish family anostomidae (Teleostei, Ostariophysi, Characiformes).  ''Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society'' 154:70-210.

* ''Laemolyta sp.'' added as species
* ''Leporinus'' cf. ''ecuadorensis'' added as species
* ''Leporinus'' cf. ''fasciatus'' added as species
* ''Leporinus'' cf. ''friderici'' added as species
* ''Leporinus'' cf. ''moralesi'' added as species
* ''Leporinus'' cf. ''niceforoi'' added as species
* ''Leporinus sp.'' added as species
* ''Citharinus sp.'' added as species
* ''Distichodus sp.'' added as species
* ''Petulanos'' added as genus
* ''Anostomus intermedius'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Petulanos intermedius''
* ''Anostomus plicatus'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Petulanos plicatus''
* ''Anostomus spiloclistron'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Petulanos spiloclistron''
* ''Hypomasticus'' added as genus (was subgenus of ''Leporinus'')
* ''Leporinus despaxi'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Hypomasticus despaxi''
* ''Leporinus megalepis'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Hypomasticus megalepis''
* ''Leporinus mormyrops'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Hypomasticus mormyrops''
* ''Leporinus pachycheilus'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Hypomasticus pachycheilus''


=Changes resulting from invited update (April 2008) of Mayden and Conway=

Notes: This update contains many subfamily assignments.  We don't currently include subfamilies in the TTO, but the update file will be retained in case this policy changes.

* ''Paracanthocobitis'' added as synonym to ''Acanthocobitis'' (Grant 2007)
* Botiidae added as family (Nalbant, T. T. 2002))
* ''Botia'' moved to family Botiidae
* ''Chromobotia'' moved to family Botiidae
* ''Leptobotia'' moved to family Botiidae
* ''Parabotia'' moved to family Botiidae
* ''Sinibotia'' moved to family Botiidae
* ''Syncrossus'' moved to family Botiidae
* ''Yasuhikotakia'' moved to family Botiidae
* ''Bibarba'' added as genus to family Cobitidae (Chen & Chen 2007)
* ''Bibarba bibarba'' added as species (Chen & Chen 2007)
* ''Erythroculter'' no change (unpublished suggestion to demote to synonym of Chandoichthys)
* ''Akrokolioplax'' no change (already in CoF CASGEN:10888)
* ''Henicorhynchus'' obsoleted/demoted to synonym of ''Bangana'' (Smith 1945)
* ''Henicorhynchus lobatus'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Bangana lobatus''
* ''Henicorhynchus siamensis'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Bangana siamensis''
* ''Henicorhynchus lineatus'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Bangana lineatus''
* ''Henicorhynchus ornatipinnis'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Bangana ornatipinnis''
* ''Acra'' changed so it is now a synonym of ''Bangana'' (was subgenus in CoF)
* ''Longiculter'' no change (uncertain subfamily change)
* ''Chalcalburnus'' obsoleted/demoted to synonym of ''Alburnus'' (as per online CoF) - member species pending TTO revision
* ''Psilorhynchoides'' obsoleted/demoted to synonym of ''Psilorhynchus'' (Conway & Kottelat 2007)
* ''Psilorhynchoides pseudecheneis'' changed to /demoted to synonym of ''Psilorhynchus pseudecheneis''
* ''Psilorhynchoides arunachalensis'' changed to/demoted to synonym of ''Psilorhynchus arunachalensis''
* ''Psilorhyncus robustus'' added as species (Conway & Kottelat 2007)
* ''Celesteichthys'' obsoleted/demoted to synonym of Danio (Roberts 2007)
* ''Celesteichthys margaritatus'' changed to/added as synonym of ''Danio margaritatus''
* ''Bengala'' demoted to synonym of ''Megarasbora''
* ''Bengala elanga'' changed to/demoted to synonym of ''Megarasbora elanga''
* ''Cyprinopsis'' no change, problem appears in description date, not covered in TTO
* ''Mirolabeo'' no change, uncertain demotion to synonym of ''Bangana''
* ''Vaillantellidae'' added as family (Slechtova et al. 2007)
* ''Vaillantella'' moved to family Vaillantellidae
* ''Caucus'' – appears as cypriniform in online CoF, but was not in CAS species table so never added to TTO; after consultation recommendation was to remove/not add; no change.
* ''Oreodaimon'' – appears as synonym to Pseudolabrus in online CoF, no change.
* ''Orthrias barbatulus zetensis'' no change (already demoted in CoF)
* ''Schistura cryptofasciata'' no change (already in CoF; CASSPC 68781)
* ''Notropis harperi'' changed to/demoted to synonym of ''Pteronotropis harperi''
* ''Microrasbora micropthalma'' added as species (Jiang, Chen & Yang 2008)
* ''Araiocypris'' added as genus to Cyprinidae
* ''Araiocypris batodes'' added as species (Conway & Kottelat 2008)


=Changes resulting from publication Conway (2005)=
* ''Rasbora'' cf. ''bankanensis'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication de Pinna and Grande (2003)=
* ''Osteoglossum sp.'' added as species
* ''Elops sp.'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Conway et al. (2008)=


* ''Oxygaster hypophthalmus'' added as synonym of ''Parachela hypophthalmus''
* ''Rasboroides vaterifloris'' added as synonym of ''Rasbora vaterifloris''
* ''Devario'' cf. ''aequipinnatus'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Vari(1995)=

Citation is:
Vari RP. 1995. The Neotropical fish family Ctenoluciidae (Teleostei:
Ostariophysi: Characiformes): supra and intrafamilial phylogenetic
relationships, with a revisionary study. ''Smithsonian Contributions to
Zoology'' 564: 103.

* ''Agoniates sp.'' added as species
* ''Copella sp.'' added as species
* ''Distichodus sp.'' added as species
* ''Eugnathichthys sp.'' added as species
* ''Hemistichodus sp.'' added as species
* ''Hoplias'' cf. ''malabaricus'' added as species
* ''Hydrocynus sp.'' added as species
* ''Lebiasina sp.'' added as species
* ''Mesoborus sp.'' added as species
* ''Pyrrhulina sp.'' added as species
* ''Salminus sp.'' added as species
* ''Hydrolycus pectoralis'' added as synonym of ''Hydrolycus scomberoides''


=Changes resulting from publication Cavender and Coburn (1992)=

Citation is:
Cavender, Ted M., and Miles M. Coburn. 1992. Phylogenetic relationships of North American cyprinids. Pp. 293-327. In: Systematics, Historical Ecology, and North American Freshwater Fishes. R.L. Mayden (Ed.). Stanford University Press. Stanford, California. 969 p.

* ''Spratellicypris'' added as synonym for genus ''Puntius''
* ''Hybosis labrosa'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella labrosa''
* ''Hybosis monocha'' added as synonym for ''Erimonax monocha''
* ''Hybosis zanema'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella zanema''
* ''Notropis ardens'' added as synonym for ''Lythrurus ardens''
* ''Notropis caeruleus'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella caerulea''
* ''Notropis callistius'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella callistia''
* ''Notropis camurus'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella camura''
* ''Notropis cerasinus'' added as synonym for ''Luxilus cerasinus''
* ''Notropis chloristius'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella chloristia''
* ''Notropis chrysocephalus'' added as synonym for ''Luxilus chrysocephalus''
* ''Notropis coccogenis'' added as synonym for ''Luxilus coccogenis''
* ''Notropis formosus'' added as synonym for ''Luxilus formosa''
* ''Notropis galacturus'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella galactura''
* ''Notropis niveus'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella nivea''
* ''Notropis pyrrhomelas'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella pyrrhomelas''
* ''Notropis trichroistius'' added as synonym for ''Cyrinella trichroistia''
* ''Notropis venustus'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella venusta''
* ''Notropis whipplei'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella whipplei''
* ''Notropis xaenurus'' added as synonym for ''Cyprinella xaenura''
* ''Notropis zonatus'' added as synonym for ''Luxilus zonatus''
* ''Notropis zonistius'' added as synonym for ''Luxilus zonistius''
* ''Semotilus margarita'' added as synonym for ''Margariscus margarita''
* ''Engraulicypris argenteus'' added as synonym for ''Rastrineobola argentea''
* ''Moroco steindachneri'' added as synonym for ''Phoxinus steindachneri''
* ''Osteocheilus hasseltii'' added as synonym for ''Osteochilus hasseltii''
* ''Rhotee cotio'' added as synonym for ''Osteobrama cotio''


=Changes resulting from publication de Pinna (1996)=

Citation is:
de Pinna MCC. 1996. A phylogenetic analysis of the Asian catfish families Sisoridae, Akysidae, and Amblycipitidae, with a hypothesis on the relationships of the neotropical Aspredinidae (Teleostei, Ostariophysi).
''Fieldiana: Zoology'' (New Series) 84:1-83.

* ''Akysis sp. 1'' added as species
* ''Akysis sp. 2'' added as species
* ''Akysis sp. 3'' added as species
* ''Erethistes sp.'' added as species
* ''Exostoma sp.'' added as species
* ''Glyptothorax sp.'' added as species
* ''Bunocephalus sp.'' added as species
* ''Ernstichthys sp.'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Conway and Mayden (2007)=

Citation is:
Conway, KW. and Mayden RL. 2007. The gill arches of Psilorhynchus (Ostariophysi: Psilorhynchidae). ''Copeia'' ? 267-280.

* ''Acanthocobitis sp.'' added as species
* ''Beaufortia'' cf. ''leveretti'' added as species
* ''Gastromyzon sp.'' added as species
* ''Ictiobius sp.'' added as species
* ''Acantopsis sp.'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Armbruster (2004)=

Citation is:
Armbruster, JW. 2004.  Phylogenetic relationships of the suckermouth armoured catfishes (Loricariidae) with emphasis on the Hypostominae and the Ancistrinae.  ''Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society'' 141:1-80.

* ''Megalancistrus gigas'' added as synonym for ''Megalancistrus parananus''
* ''Hemiancistrus panamensis'' added as synonym for ''Hemiancistrus aspidolepis''
* ''Hemiancistrus sp.'' added as species
* ''Hemiancistrus sp. Brazil'' added as species
* ''Peckoltia sp. 1'' added as species
* ''Peckoltia sp. 2'' added as species
* ''Peckoltia sp. big spot'' added as species
* ''Pseudancistrus sp. gold spot'' added as species
* ''Hypostomus plecostomus 2'' added as species
* ''Hypostomus sp. round snout 1'' added as species
* ''Hypostomus sp. round snout 2'' added as species
* ''Hemipsilichthys sp.'' added as species
* ''Hemipsilichthys?'' added as species
* ''Kronichthys sp. 1'' added as species
* ''Kronichthys sp. 2'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Schaefer (1990)=

Citation is:
Schaefer, SA. 1990.  Anatomy and relationships of the scoloplacid catfishes.  ''Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia'' 142:167-210.

* ''Arius sp.'' added as species
* ''Henonemus sp.'' added as species
* ''Stegophilus sp.'' added as species
* ''Trichomycterus sp.'' added as species
* ''Tridentopsis sp.'' added as species
* ''Astroblepus sp.'' added as species
* ''Cochliodon sp.'' added as species
* ''Neoplecostomus sp.'' added as species
* ''Perugia xanthus'' added as synonym of ''Megalonema xanthum''
* ''Corydoras barbatus'' added as synonym of ''Scieromystax barbatus''
* ''Isorineloricaria spinosissima'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Winterbottom (1980)=

Citation is:
Winterbottom, R. 1980.  Systematics, osteology and phylogenetic relationships of fishes of the Ostariophysan subfamily Anostominae (Characoidei, Anostomidae).  ''Royal Ontario Museum Life Science Contributions'' 123:112.

* ''Gnathodolus sp.'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Castro and Vari (2004)=

Citation is:
Castro, RMC. and Vari, RP. 2004.  Detritivores of the South American fish family Prochilodontidae (Ostariophysi: Characiformes): a phylogenetic and revisionary study.  ''Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology'' 622:1-190.

* ''Anostomus sp.'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Toledo-Piza (2000)=

* ''Cynodon sp.'' added as species
* ''Hydrolycus sp.'' added as species
* ''Agoniates sp.'' added as species
* ''Gnathocharax sp.'' added as species
* ''Heterocharax sp.'' added as species
* ''Mylossoma sp.'' added as species
* ''Roeboides sp.'' added as species
* ''Serrasalmus sp.'' added as species
* ''Triportheus sp.'' added as species
* ''Hoplias'' cf. ''malabaricus'' added as species
* ''Hemiodus sp.'' added as species
* ''Hydrocynus sp.'' added as species
* ''Pyrrhulina sp.'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Toledo-Piza (2007)=

Citation is:
Toledo-Piza, M. 2007. Phylogenetic relationships among Acestrorhynchus species (Ostariophysi: Characiformes: Acestrorhynchidae). ''Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society'' 151:691-757.

* ''Bryconops sp.'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Lucena and Menezes (1998)=

Citation is:
Lucena, C. A. S., and N. A. Menezes. 1998. A phylogenetic analysis of Roestes Günther and Gilbertolus Eigenmann with a hypothesis on the relationships of the Cynodontidae and Acestrorhynchidae (Teleostei, Ostariophysi, Characiformes) in L. R. Malabarba, R. E. Reis, R. P. Vari, Z. M. S. Lucena, and C. A. S. Lucena, eds. ''Phylogeny and Classification of Neotropical Fishes''. EDIPUCRS, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

* ''Brycon sp.'' added as species
* ''Roeboides sp.'' added as species
* ''Roestes sp.'' added as species

=Changes resulting from publication Weitzman and Fink (1983)=

Citation is:
Weitzman, S. H., and W. L. Fink. 1983. Relationships of the neon tetras, a group of South American freshwater fishes (Teleostei, Characidae), with comments on the phylogeny of New World Characiforms. ''Bulletin of the Museum
of Comparative Zoology'', Harvard University 150:339-395.

* ''Aphyodite sp.'' (Weitzman and Fink 1983)
* ''Characidium sp.'' (Weitzman and Fink 1983)
* ''Hemigrammus sp.'' (Weitzman and Fink 1983)
* ''Hyphessobrycon sp.'' (Weitzman and Fink 1983)
* ''Leptobrycon sp.'' (Weitzman and Fink 1983)
* ''Microschemobrycon sp.'' (Weitzman and Fink 1983)
* ''Oxybrycon sp.'' (Weitzman and Fink 1983)
* ''Pristella sp.'' (Weitzman and Fink 1983)
* ''Bryconamericus meridae'' added as synonym of ''Knodus meridae'
* ''Cheirodon piaba'' added as synonym of ''Serrapinnus piaba''
* ''Neolebias olbrechtsi'' added as synonym of ''Congocharax olbrechtsi''


=Update from August 2008 Catalog of Fishes=
TTO was updated from the Catalog of Fishes release of August 29, 2008 with the TTOupdate tool.  In addition to CoF changes, the TTOupdate tool captures intermediate synonyms from the CoF status text for each species name.


=Changes resulting from publication Roberts (1969)=

Citation is:
Roberts, T. R. 1969. Osteology and relationships of characoid fishes, particularly the genera Hepsetus, Salminus, Hoplias, Ctenolucius and Acestrorhynchus. ''Proceedings of the California Academy of Sciences'' 36:391-500.

* ''Anostomus sp. (Roberts 1969)'' added as species
* ''Chilodus sp. (Roberts 1969)'' added as species
* ''Hoplias sp. (Roberts 1969)'' added as species
* ''Hydrocynus sp. (Roberts 1969)'' added as species
* ''Mylossoma sp. (Roberts 1969)'' added as species
* ''Serrasalmus sp. (Roberts 1969)'' added as species


=Changes resulting from publication Weitzman and Fink (1985)=

Citation is:
Weitzman, S. H., and S. V. Fink. 1985. Xenurobryconin phylogeny and putative phermone pumps in glandulocaudine fishes (Teleostei: Characidae). ''Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology'' ?:1-121.

* ''Argopleura sp. (Weitzman and Fink 1985)'' added as species
* ''Gephyrocharax sp. (Weitzman and Fink 1985)'' added as species
* ''Tyttocharax sp. (Weitzman and Fink 1985)'' added as species

[[Category:Ontology]]
[[Category:Taxonomy]]
[[Category:Informatics]]