---
title: WebHints
---

<!--
@import "/wg/phenoscape/index.php?title=Jimallman:AjaxBlocks.css&action=raw&ctype=text/css";
-->

This page is an easily editable source for help popups in the Phenoscape web UI. Each entry below should be contained in a block element (DIV) with a mnemonic ID.

NOTE that there may be other wiki pages that also appear in the Phenoscape web UI, e.g. http://phenoscape.org/wiki/Knowledgebase:File_formats_(for_data_downloads)

<div id="WhatArePhenotypes" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''About Phenotypes'''

See additional information about phenotypes (Entities, Qualities, and optionally Relational Entities).
</div>


<div id="FindSpecificTerm" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Find a Specific Term'''

Search using any valid term (taxon, gene, etc.) in the Knowledgebase. '''You must choose a matched value from the drop-down list before you can search.'''
</div>


<div id="BrowseAllPhenotypes" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Browse All Phenotypes'''

View all phenotypes used within annotations. Narrow results by taxa, anatomical entity, phenotypic quality, or gene classification.
</div>


<div id="BrowseTaxa" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Browse Taxa'''

Browse the taxonomic hierarchy and view detailed information about each term.
</div>


<div id="BrowseAnatomicalEntities" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Browse Anatomical Entities'''

Browse the anatomy ontology hierarchy and view detailed information about each term.
</div>


<div id="BrowsePhenotypicQualities" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Browse Phenotypic Qualities'''

Browse the phenotypic quality ontology hierarchy and view detailed information about each term.
</div>


<div id="BrowseGenes" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Browse Genes'''

TODO
</div>


<div id="BrowseComparativePublications" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Browse Comparative Publications'''

TODO
</div>


<div id="QueryPhenotpyeAnnotationsToTaxa" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Query Phenotype Annotations To Taxa'''

Find '''phenotypes''' associated with particular '''taxa'''; filter by publication.
</div>


<div id="QueryPhenotpyeAnnotationsToGenes" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Query Phenotype Annotations To Genes'''

Find '''phenotypes''' associated with particular '''genes'''.
</div>


<div id="QueryTaxa" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Query Taxa'''

Find the '''taxa''' associated with a particular phenotype or publication.
</div>


<div id="QueryGenes" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Query Genes'''

Find a list of '''genes''' associated with a particular phenotype.
</div>


<div id="QueryCompatarivePublications" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Query Comparative Publications'''

Find '''publications''' that contain descriptions of particular taxa or phenotypes.
</div>


<div id="QueryPhenotpyes" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Query Phenotypes'''

Find a list of '''phenotypes''' associated with a particular taxon, gene, or publication.
</div>


<div id="VisualizePhenotypicProfileTree" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Visualize Phenotypic Profile Tree'''

Visualize the extent to which a specified set of phenotypes is exhibited within and between taxa.
</div>


<div id="VisualizePhenotypicVariationTree" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Visualize Phenotypic Variation Tree'''

Visualize the taxonomic distribution of a specified phenotype.
</div>


<div id="AboutInferredAnnotations" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Apply higher taxon annotations to all included species'''

Phenotypes annotated to a higher taxon (e.g. all Euteleosts) are assumed to apply to all organisms within that group. For example, searching for 'basihyal bone absent' would return a list of all catfish (Siluriformes) species because this phenotype has been annotated at the level of the Siluriformes.
</div>


<div id="AboutTheWorkspace" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Add to workspace'''

When viewing query results, check the box to the left of any result to add it to the workspace. On the workspace page, you can combine saved items into new queries.
</div>


<div id="ChooseTermForFacet" style="border: 2px dashed silver;">
'''Choose a specific term'''

Use this button to choose a specific term to jump to, rather than narrowing down via the ontology hierarchy links.
</div>

Add more entries here...